THE WEATHER
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers. WN SAN JUAN: High, 91 degrees; low 75 degrees. Sea level barometric pressure at 4:89 p.m., 29.90 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Aug. 19. (PU)-The following* temps were recorded today afternoon: Chicago, 71; Miami. N: New York, 78: Wahlngton, 79. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and adjoining cities: Sunny and cool weather; high temperature mine intoo 79; winds modomdoo from the North.
Temperature
MARAÑA JOURNAL
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Fest Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 20, 1949
NUMBER 13760
FIVE CENTS
CFG Bans Broadcasting Of Lotteries
ABC Announces Case Will Go to Court - Affects Entire Industry NEW YORK, Aug. 19 (PU). - Approximately 35 radio giveaway programs, broadcast on a network, with annual prizes totaling $22,000,000, are threatened today with rapid suspension by the Federal Communications Commission. The Commission .announces in a procedhlngton dispatch, the aprohannew radio rules will take effect October 1. The Washington dispatch adds that the Commission stated that no station intending to continue to broadcast lotteries would have its license renewed. But opinion in radio circles is quite divided as to how far the ' can go in banning such national programs or the countless hundreds of prize programs that are broadcast locally. Some radio station managers said that the wording of the regulation would kill most awards programs. Others believe they have seen "dozens" of escape hatches. Commission IJama Attention The dispatch coming from Wáshlngton said that the Commission, in issuing the new rules, draws attention to the Communications Act of 1934 which provides that no broadcaster "shall knowingly permit the broadcast of any advertisement or Information on any lottery, giveaway or similar project offering prizes dependent, in whole or 81a luck or chance, or prizes drawn to granted by means ry, offer of gifts, similar project." or Washington agroammission has no self-supervise Th radln programs. It men- । clones none in announcing the" new- ¡ va" rules. It merely says that the question of whether or not a particular program falls within the provisions of the law will depend on the circumstances of each case. 4When Will It Be Lottery? In any event, however, says the Commission, a program will be considered a lottery if a prize of value is awarded to any person whose selection depends in whole or in part upon chance under the following conditions: 1. If the winner is required to deposit money or other jKlor thing, or to have in his possession an. If the winner is required to bring money or any other jKlor item, or to have in his/her possession a manufactured product or program distribution. 2. IF the winner is required to be listening to the program, or watching it on television. IF the winner is required to correctly answer a question, the answer to which is offered on a radio program. 4. If the winner is required to answer the telephone in a prescribed form, or to write a letter containing a particular phrase, if the required material is broadcast by the radio station. Final Decision Practically the same rules were proposed by the Commission about a year ago. Today's decision is final. It was adopted by a 3 to 1 vote in the Commission. Commissioner Frieda Hennock dissented, and three members did not participate in the decision. The whole lottery issue arose some time ago when the Commission considered a program called "Dollars for Answers," broadcast by WARL, a radio station in Arlington, Virginia. Commission Chairman Wayne Coy, and members Rosel H. Hyde and Robert F. Jones were the ones who did not participate in the hearing. Those who voted in favor of it were Commissioners Paul A. Walker, Edward M. Webster and George Sterling. The National Association of Broadcasters quickly issued a statement disputing the legality of the new rules. It said that even though (Cont. on page 14 Col. 1)
Santo Domingo Claims State of War Exists in the Caribbean
For HAROLD B. HINTON WASHINGTON, Aug. 19 - (New York Times Speclal) - A delegation from the Dominican Republic told an Inter-American Peace Commission yesterday that a virtual state of war exists in the Caribbean area. Delegates from the Dominican Republic said after the meeting that they had presented evidence of a coming armed operation. The meeting held yesterday was the second of tUHHMAocadn by the Dominican Government to present its formal views, the Dominican Government produced additional evidence that it believes is relevant to the matter, and requested the privilege of sending a delegation to present its views.
The delegation consisted of a delegation to make an oral report. The delegation consisted of Dr. Julio Ortega Frier, former ambassador to the United States; Arturo Despradel, ambassador general; and Joaquin Salador, ambassador to Mexico. Dr. Ortega acted as spokesman. The Inter-American Peace Commission is composed of representatives of Argentina, Mexico, Cuba, Brazil and the United States. The Commission will decide Pau! C. Daniels, American representative, handed over his Government's reply to the Commission's original letter, but refused to give it to the public. He said the Commission would have to decide whether it should be made public. Senior Daniels, a former ambassador to Honduras, is now director of the Office of U.S. Foreign Affairs (Cont. on page 14, Col. 8).
Judge Angel M. Umplerre Takes Office on Monday
B í I I I > ■ ' Ti v - UJ ."/w"■FSWW -■ Or W ■ NI * ¡ K" xk " ft F ! -*'*-** /' " mi . 1 ■L * UK" -V' ' .
The Attorney General of Puerto Rico, Vicente Géigel Polanco (right) presents to Angel Umplerre his diploma of confirmation as District Attorney General, as a result of the favorable action taken by the Senate in favor of his appointment (Photo EL MUNDO).
Yesterday he was presented with his diploma by the Attorney General. Thanks "For what it means to the Judiciary" By BENJAMINSANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Attorney General, Mr. Vicente Géigel Polanco, yesterday presented Mr. Angel M". Umplerre his diploma as a Judge of the Dis-
trito General. 1 The latter said he was grateful for the appointment made by the Governor, sefior Luis Mufioz Marín, "in all that this means for the judiciary of my country". He thanked the Governor, the Attorney General and the Senate, which unanimously confirmed him last Thursday. The swearing-in ceremonies have been set for next Monday at 9:00 a.m., Judge Umplerre said yesterday. The ceremonies, although simple, are expected to be of extraordinary importance because of the circumstances surrounding this particular case. Espora Doing Well Expressing that he hopes to reciprocate Ja trust placed in him by the GoWnadot the Attorney General and the Sanado Insular, Mr. Umplarre said the following to EL MUNDO, after receiving the diploma : 'Agrádese© in all that this means for the judiciary of my pals, this appointment.'
*F~~ -- Fernós Confident Congress Will Act On Measures Expects Committees To Discharge Island-Related Bills By PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, Aug. 19 (PU). - Commissioner Fernós, M.D., said today that he has found a generally favorable atmosphere in the Senate on four bills that are important to Puerto Rico. Fernós expects that the legislation* authorizing the Puerto Rico Legislature to increase the salary of the Supreme Court Justices will be approved. This legislation, already approved by the House of Representatives, is ready to be considered by the Senate. He is awaiting action on the calendar of measures not Fernós said he also expects early approval by the Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee of House-passed legislation preserving the citizenship of certain Puerto Ricans. The bill is before a subcommittee composed of Senators Ernest McFarland, D-Arizona; Robert H. Kerr, D-Oklahoma; and Hugh Butler, R-Nebraska. Citizenship Bill Fernos said he has written to Me Farland suggesting certain technical changes to the bill that would provide that anyone born in Puerto Rico who becomes a U.S. citizen under the Organic Act should be considered equal in status to natural-born citizens. Naturalized citizens can lose their citizenship under certain technical provisions of the nationality laws. Fernós said he also expects favorable reports next week from the Senate Agriculture Committee on two pork bills already approved by the House. One of the bills would allow for the organization of federal territorial banks and territorial banking associations in Puerto Rico, facilitating the administration of the Puerto Rico Territorial Banks (Cont. on page 10, Col. o).
"The Attorney General declined to authorize any comment yesterday, claiming that he had already spoken to the Governor of Puerto Rico, and that he had already spoken to the Senate, He said, however, that he reaffirmed everything he had said in relation to this matter, adding that he was very pleased to be able to deliver the diploma sent by Governor Mufioz Marin.
During his testimony before the Senate Nominations Committee, Attorney General Geigel Polanco said that Judge Umplerre is "a man of merit, severe, reflective, honest and of ample judicial culture, with the integrity of character to make himself respected. He added that the government will protect the independence of all its judicial officials, and that it will not allow them to be threatened, or coerced, or that it will not try to bend them with political influences. Within 24 hours after the Senate unanimously confirmed Judge Angel M. Umplerre's appointment, the Governor sent his diploma to the Department of Justice. The Attorney General called Judge Umplerre to his office to deliver it, but he was unable to go until 4:30 due to his work at the Court. The Governor says in the diploma that "considering the merits that concur in Angel M. Umplerre, I have designated him, and with the advice and consent of the Senate of Puerto Rico, I appoint him as General District Judge, granting him the authority and power to perform the duties of said office, in accordance with . (Cont in page 14, Col. 7).
Veterans Program Unfunded
Muñoz Addresses Cable to Fernos Urges Administration to Authorize Appropriation- - Believes Crisis Approaching Governor Mufioz Marin is interested in finalizing a contract between the Veterans Administration and the Department of Ins0rgency that would direct the local Veterans Administration to advance the funds necessary to cover the program's expenses for the period July through October. The veterans' educational service is paid for with Insular and federal funds. Everything was going smoothly until the Washington office of the Veterans Administration changed the rules on the paco fees. The Governor has been concerned about the problem because even though the Puerto Rico government has done its part, it still has not allocated the means to facilitate payment to veterans program employees. Oahle to Fernós Yesterday at Fortaleza the following communiqué was given to the Press: The Governor addressed the following cable today to Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern, Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington: "Please confer with Mr. A. H. Munk, Director of the Veterans Training Service. Munk, director of the Vocational Rehabilitation Training and Instruction Service, and urge immediate approval of contract V4055V-86 between the Department of Instruction and the Veterans Administration or authorize the local Veterans Administration in San Juan to advance funds to cover the period July through October. The failure to approve this contract creates an intolerable situation, close to a crisis. The program's personnel have not been paid for the last three months, s "The veterans' education program currently benefits a total of 23,000 or so veterans. The program is jointly funded by the federal and state governments. There was no problem with funding until May 1949, when the Veterans Administration headquarters changed the rules establishing the dues it pays. "Previously, the fees were computed on the basis of tuition stipends, which in turn were based on what civilian students paid at the Puerto Rican schools. This naturally necessitated a careful study of all program expenses so that new contracts could be formulated to govern from then on. The Department of Instruction and the Veterans Administration worked tirelessly until at last the new contracts were either approved by both agencies or sent to Wáshlngton's office for final approval. Without this requirement, the Finance Division of the Veterans Administration cannot advance the funds needed to pay for personnel and other services. -Both the Veterans Administration of Puerto Rico and the Department of Instruction have been making strenuous efforts to obtain approval of these contracts and have been in communication with the central offices of the Veterans Administration, impressing upon them the urgency of approving these contracts. The situation created in Puerto Rico by the new regulation has been general in all the countries. (Cont- on page 14, Col. 5)
Justice Intervenes - -V To Conduct Investigation Of Jailed Pastor
By BENJAMIN SANTANA Rodoctor do EL MUNDO < The Department of Justice has been asked to reinvestigate the case of Crescendo Espinosa, imprisoned since last May 31, for an indefinite period of time. The Humacao District Court convicted him of civil contempt after he refused to pay a $5 weekly allowance to a girl whose paternity he stubbornly denies. His wife and six children went to the Justice Department accompanied by several parishioners of the congregation that Espinosa led in the Aguacate neighborhood of Humacao. Article 145 of the Peñol Code of Puerto Rico stipulates a maximum of thirty days in jail or a fine of two hundred dollars for criminal contempt. Prosecutor M. Royos Serrano,
who took note of the complainants' allegations, will submit a report to the Attorney General for him to decide on the appropriate action. El Coso do Espinoso Crescendo Espinosa led a religious congregation in the Aguacate neighborhood of Humacao called Hermanos Unidos en Cristo, Inc. according to the complainants. Some time ago, the churches affiliated with the atheta held a convention, which was attended by Alejo Miranda and Aurea Pérez, delegates from Santa Cruz. This one was held in Espinosa's house, in spite of his refusal, because his house was very small, with only one room, according to what they alleged. Several months later, Miranda wrote to one of the leaders of the church in Aguaca (Cont. on page 14. Col. 3)
Influenza Epidemic Increases in Several Towns; Health Reports 925 More Cases
Imported Cement Without Maximo Ferré To Bring 110,000 Sacks. Stevedores Announce They Will Not Go on Strike By Luis Mánche" Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO Mr. Antonio Vlcén" Rio", head of the General Administration of Supplies stated yesterday that imported cement does not have a maximum price set by said agency. He referred to the administrative orders" issued by the AGS, which he said apply only to cement produced in the country. Mr. Vlcéns Rio" authorized the following statements: "Administrative order number 155 of September 4, 1947, as amended by number 155 of September 5, 1947, fixes maximum prices for sales of cement produced in the country, and refers and specifies only and exclusively to cement produced here, for which the maximum prices continue and will continue to be in effect. Nothing in such orders shall be construed to apply to imported cement, on which no maximum price or import restrictions have been fixed and which may be sold at reasonable profit. "only if the Imports of cement from abroad had a permanent character and there were speculation and excessive benefits in the sale of imported cement, the General Administration of Supplies would intervene in time, with the necessary measures to the inWflHMgb. "These clarifications are born for the knowledge of the people in general and of those interested persons, distributors and contractors who, having works in course, would like to Import-cement while the strike of the factories of the country is being solved." Rumor Denied Rumor Meanwhile tsnto, the leaders of the dock workers yesterday denied a rumor circulating, in "1 sense that the estibadoíes They would refuse to unload from the barbos the cement to be imported, in case of recourse to the Imporración del to alleviate the shortage of the same. Both the sefior Eusebio G. Moreno, leader of Council Number 1 of the International Longshoremen's Association (ILA), and Sefior Aurelio Hernandez, of Council Number 2, stated that "we have not thought of and considered such an action. Both stated that the provisions of the agreement signed by the longshoremen with the shipping companies prevent the workers from declaring a boycott in support of it, which would result from such action, under the Taft-Hartley Act. Trimpr Incident" Yesterday.in the morning arose'e! first Incident of violence, when rqglitró a fight between a striker of the Ponce Cement and the leader of the Union of Employee" of the Glass Industry, sefior Jerónimo Mato". The fight took place in front of the factory grounds, and according to Sgt. Rodriguez, who commands the police post located in front of the Compafila de Fomento factories in Guaynabo, the (Cont. on page 14, Col. 8)
' Possibility of Creating a School of Journalism on the Island to be Studied
¡ . Dean Carl Ackerman, of Columbia, to Hold Interview with Benitez
W Dr. CARL W. ACKERMAN is a journalism graduate from Chungking, China. The Maria Moors Cabot Awards, given since 1937 to journalists in the United States and Latin America who are most distinguished in the preaching of Pan-American ideals, were organized (Cont. on page 14. Col. 2).
1.he possibility of establishing a journalism school in Puerto Rico will be discussed next Tuesday by senior Carl W. Aduerman, dean of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, with University of Puerto Rico Chancellor Jaime Benitez. Dean Ackerman is a guest in Puerto Rico of Admiral Daniel E. Barbey, commander of the Tenth Naval District, and will remain in Puerto Rico for several days. He will then leave for Caracas. Venezuela, in negotiations related to the School of Journalism established in that city under the auspices of the Institution that he directs. The distinguished perlod'sta considers Puerto Rico the ideal place for the establishment of a School of Journalism of Inter-American character. Among the reasons he pointed out was the complete freedom enjoyed on the island. School in China Dr. Ackerman, who c" Dean of the Graduate School of Journalism since 1931, founded with Dr. Hollington T. Tong the EsW oods Postpones Rent Control Will Request Local Staff to Maintain L$y For of Funds By HAYMOND H. WILSON WASHINGTON, Aug. 19. (PU)- Home ' Accelerator Tlghe Woods disclosed today that he has been forced to abandon all plans to lift the controls" "on 4,500,000 unldade" reel den ale". Instead of lifting the controls, he will ask local officials to maintain the controls in areas where he cannot maintain offices for lack of money. Woods, who announced his now-abandoned plan after Congress ordered sharp reductions in his budget, estimated that he will need to lift controls in 150 to 200 of the nation's 1,000 control areas. He has proposed lifting controls in one-third of the areas. He also said he will be forced to lay off about 2,462 of his 5,662 employees paly-wide, and operate his seven regional offices with minimal staff in an effort to stay within his budget. t Original Plan Woods said his advisors told him he had to abandon his original plan to arbitrarily lift controls because the demand for rental housing has not been met in all the areas he thought it would be necessary. In those areas, the volunteer advisory boards will be asked to take over the management of the local offices, he said.
The San Juan Municipal Housing Authority received yesterday the authorization from the Federal Housing Authority for the additional construction of two hundred and fifty-two "housing units" in the Puerta de Tierra project. This was reported by Senior Cario" Clausse, who also revealed that this is one of the first allocations of funds" under the new homes law recently approved by Congress. The Puerta de Tierra project has been approved by the Federal Housing Authority, and therefore the Federal Housing Authority has allocated funds from the new law for its completion. t 464 Units With the authorization to build the additional 252 units, the Puerta de Tierra project will consist of 484 units of housing to be rented to low-income persons. At present, 232 units are under construction. This project is being carried out by contractor Francisco Nevaras, and is expected to be completed in aels to eight months. The bidding for these new units, Mr. Clausell revealed, "should be announced soon. The project will consist of six, four-story buildings. One of the first The San Juan Municipal Housing Authority was one of the first to receive funds under the new housing law. The funds authorized are (Continued on Page 14, Col. 8).
The photograph captures the moment when Mrs. de Crescendo Espinosa was waiting with her children in Room 4®, e !P er ? 3* 1 Department of Justice, while the church eunislon supporting Espinosa requested from prosecutor Manuel Boyes Serrano, the reinvestigation of her husband's case. The photo shows Mrs. Espinote and her 18 children, all minors. - (Photo EL MUNDO)
The School of Tropical Medicine and the Department of Health are conducting a study of the Influenza virus, on the occasion of the epidemic outbreak of this disease on the island. This study is being carried out at the Humacao Municipal Hospital, which has been one of the populations most affected by the disease. Guillermo Arbona and Abel de Juan, from the Division of Public Health and the Bureau of Epidemiology, and Dr. Pomales, from the School of Tropical Medicine, are collaborating in the study. People who are affected by an acute stage of the disease have been taken to carry out the ""- t, t, t are affected by an acute stage of the disease, to carry out the" i work. The cultures "e sent to ha . School of Tropical Medicine. The purpose is to determine what type of influenza is attacking Puerto Rico. Of this disease . there is a serle of type", of which e" the most acute and perjudlS cial, the type A. By means of the "-" tudlo you can also corroborate exactly the virulence of the mlk i ma, e "tándo"" in better" condicione" to attack it. F.l Epidemic© I The Influenza epidemic that began in January of this year, is gaining momentum in several towns in the lilac; according to the latest report submitted to the Epidemiology Bureau of the Department of Health. 925 new" cato" have been reported for the" 17th and 18th of the current" day. On the other hand, the" eatadhtlca" ofl- " clalea reveal that during the first five months of the year there were 52 deaths from influenza and 840 deaths from other diseases such as pneumonia, bronchopneumonia, bronchopneumonia and other forms of pneumonia. i The data on the" deaths from Influenza, as well as from influenza. fluenza, as well as for the other" illnesses associated with the June and July months, have not yet been clarified by the Department of Health, but it is estimated that the number of deaths due to this disease during these months is the highest during the influenza epidemic outbreak. In line with the circular letter from the Commissioner of Health, in which the Medical Offices of the Public Health Units were asked to conduct a study of the Influenza in their respective localities, the Epidemiology Bureau has begun to receive more detailed information. The" diseases of the Units are visiting the physicians in the respective towns, to whom they have provided morbidity report cards, in order to notify all the clinical cases of Influenza they have under their care. In addition, daily visits are being made to the local Demographic Register to obtain information on deaths from the following diseases: influenza, influenza, pneumonia 1 in all its forms and bronchitis. 1 Although influenza is developing in a benign form, health authorities fear that it will increase in virulence as it passes rapidly from one person to another. Ia" Deaths Influenza deaths during the first few months of the year are divided as follows: January 18, with a mortality rate of 8.6 per hundred thousand inhabitants; February 12, with a rate of 7.2; March 9, with a rate of 4.9; April 1 1 11, with a rate of 8.1; and May 4, with a rate of 8.1 (Cont. on page 14, Col. 3) M Alvarado Postulated 1 Before Umpierre I Arcillo Alvarado, to the surprise of the women who appeared before the San Juan District Court, yesterday morning, postulated before Judge Angel M. 1 Umpierre, whose appointment he had tenaciously opposed the day before, before the Senate Nominating Committee. In the same alone was acting the prosecutor Rafael Padró Parés, the only eyewitness of the Incident 11 occurred a few days before between the 11 Magistrate and Mr. Alvara- ' I do, in which, according to the allegation, The latter ll tried to exert his poU-j j tical influence to have Judge Umplerre 1" < ] impose a fine, in lieu of a fine, on a defendant who had been detained by Mr. Alvarado, uj He asked for postponement Upon entering the courtroom, Mr. Alvarado took a seat in front of Judge Alvarado (Cont. at page 14, Col. 8) [