THE NANDO
Olmo homered against Page in Dodgers setback, 4 to 3
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Cloudy and rainy, becoming partly cloudy with a few "scattered showers" in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 88 degrees; low, 74 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.82 inches" of mercury.
NEW YORK, October T. (FU) Ba U afternoon today m Im slguíen* tea temperature" reported: New York, M; Washington, 78; Miami, 81; Chicago, 82. The Weather Bureau predicted that the fourth game between loe Eaqulvadorea and the Yankees so will be held under cloudy skies, but that it will not rain. Although the weather will be a little chilly in the morning, the temperature is expected to be warmer in /> taro."
TOMORROW'S NEWSPAPER '
YEAR XXX
SAN JUAN, PUEHTOHICO - SATURDAY OCTOBER S, 1949
NUMBER 13808 CINCG CENTAVOS
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B. |
Emerging Mise Decided Game With Single In 99 With 3 On Board.
(Jampanel la, Reese Give Home Runs Bombero Page Gets Triumph Over Branca - Total 32,700 In Attendance By CARL LUNDQUIST NEW YORK, Oct. 7 - (PU) - Giant Johnny Mize, an old and aran competitor acereindoa" at the end of a aran ca* rcete,(got the most important hit of "u. life today - An eenclllo how ' pop-up, which led off a three-run rally" in the ninth inning, and gave the" New York Yankee" a four-run victory, "over the" Brooklyn Dodaera, in Game 3 of the World Series. The hit, which pushed the run across, became even more important in the second half of the ninth inning, when left-hander Joe Pag - canning after one of my long relief innings in the third - was touched for two scintillating home runs almost in succession: one by Luí Rodriguez Olmo and the other by Rpy Campanella. OLMO's work (The Puerto Rican OLMO batted 4-1 (the home run), pushed and scored s a run, not propinó out" to the field, did not make assistance" and did not commit errors, He played in the whole game). The Yankees, winning in front of 32,700 dejected fans at Ebbet Field, went to the plate against the Dodgers in a tense and terrible game. It had to happen sooner or later - an end to the consistent pitching effort that made both teams' troubled sluggers appear as if they were substitutes in a Class D league. But today came e "e final, and with "úi bita explosion. Branca, who retired fourteen batters in a row, struck out Yogi Berra in the ninth for the Yankees, after Jackl" Robinson had thrown out Tommy Henrieh "on a grounder" whose catch turned out to be the best defensive play of the day. Robinson El Robador swerved to first, went all the way down and lifted his glove to get a hit. Then, as Borra was bunted, it looked like Branca would get out of trouble because he retired Joo DiMagglo, the Yankees' ineffective hitter so far this season, on a foul ball. Brown's HIS But Bobby Brown fired a single for the first hit against Branca since the fourth inning, stopping Berra at second. Gene Woodllng came in to bat and got the base on a count of three and a do". Coach Clyde came to talk to Branca, and after a long conference he decided - to leave him on the mound. That delegated Yankees manager Casey Stengel to make the next move, and the old pilot called Mizo, once the National League home run king, Julon was bought from the New York Giants in August for $75,000 as life insurance to win the pennant; Mizo, on the other hand, needed life insurance when he was injured after playing in only two games down the stretch. But no one seemed to think much about that, with the exception of Johnny himself, as he stepped up to the plate, his sights set on the left field fence. Mise Con do" balls and a °"trlke" single, Mito fired a bunt so high, it could have been a home run in o! Yankee Stadium. Instead, it was only a single at Ebbets Field against the fence, but it turned out to be the most important of his life. Berra and Brown scored, putting the game 3*1 and Woodling also crossed the rubber a moment later when Jerry Coleman singled against Jack Banta, Banta, appearing in the close barn after the horse had left, took over on the Brooklyn mound when Miz" hit his hit. But it wasn't over yet. Not by any means. Pago, who had to pitch five innings, and two bullpens after relieving the out-of-control Tommy Byrne in the third, either cooled down a bit in the decisive episode, or suddenly got tired. For after retiring Gil Hodges, with a grounder to the box, he unleashed a fat pitch to OLMO and the ball flew high into the right field bleachers. Pago struck out Duke Snlder, but Campanella mimicked OLMO with another four-corner hit that landed in the left field bleachers. Anxious seconds elapsed on the Yankees" bench when the emerging Bruce Edwards appeared at the plate, but Pago, ended the tension quickly by sliding him a third strike sung to end the contest. ♦ Inning Score: New York 001 000 003 - 4-5-0 Brooklyn 000 100 003 - 3-5-0 Byrne, Pago (4) and Berra; Branca, Banta (9) and Campanella. Wins: Pago and Bronca lost. Home runs: Reeso, OLMO and Campanella.
5 Police Officers In Rio Piedras Are On Trial
They are . Five police officers" ln "uleree, stationed" in the barracks of the Polich d" Hato Rey and Rio Piedra" must appear on October 17 before Judge Gustavo Cruzado Pujol", of the Second Section of the Municipal Court of Rio Piedra", accusation" in complaint" sworn" by four citizens" of Rio Piedra". The" citizens" Sabina Reyes, Pe. dro Alemán Alemán, José A. León, and Juito Rosario Peña, swore a complaint" for various" crimes" before Judge William Santana, of the First Section of the Municipal Court of Rio Piedras, against Islanders Eduardo Reyes MIllán, Agaplto-Lozano, Jacinto Caldero, Fernando Flores and Hipólito Ortlz. The criminal eaio" against these policemen correspond to the numbers" 52875, 52674, 51406, 51402. 51,(Cont, on page 18, Col. 5)
By JOHN A. GOLDSMITH WASHINGTON, Oct. 7, (PU)-Government mediators met today with John L. Lewis and leading mine owners in a meeting to settle the 19-day bituminous coal industry strike. They met for three hours only to explore the situation, after which Federal Mediation Director Cyrua S. Chlng held separate talks with the President of the Miners' Union and the mine owners. Chlng dodged the conversation"" by "eponymous in an effort to prevent the coal shortage from developing into an economy-wrecking crisis. Edwin G. Nourse, chairman of Truman's Council of Economic Advisers, said the steel and coal "strike" could become "an alarming factor" if it lasts more than another month.
. ■' ■' '■ ¿ !
Intermediate Gerry Coleman, of the Yankees, leaps over Dodgers' Puerto Rican keeper Luis Rodrigue" Olmo - who slides uselessly to the second pad - and I made the shot to Eoner out at 1st Inldal to Gil Hodges. The play occurred in the seventh inning of yesterday's game at Yenes Stadium. Olmo opened with a single and although he tried to avoid the double play, he could not. Hodges hit a grounder to shortstop and Rlssuto passed the ball to Coleman. The Dodger coach is Jake Pitler (81) trying to give denser to Hodges so he doesn't get the out. The inidallata is Henrich. Brooklyn won, 1-0. (Photo by P, A.)
Gov't Seeks Umt Formula To Fix Coal Strike
Lewis Meets with Employers, Facing Imminent Serious Crisis in Nation's Economy
IF the strikes" are settled within that time, he said, the outlook is for prosperity during the rest of this year and also during 1950. None of the participants wanted to discuss what was discussed during the three-hour preliminary meeting." Lewis and 1o" patrons refused to speak. Chlng's only comment was "we were just expiring." This was the first government action in the coal negotiations and the first meeting between Lewis and representatives of the entire industry. The burly president of the United Mine Workers has been going back and forth, meeting separately with northern and southern producers. These" talks were recessed so that all parties could attend the mediation conference. (Cont. on page Ifi, Col. 5)
Enrollment to begin. Medical School Before December
I. Sola Morales Supports Rio Piedras Editorial Case
Expresses that "Hopefully Jos. Who Should Understand It". Condemns Unnecessary Obstacles
Solidarizing with the editorial of EL MUNDO that discussed the Rio Piedras case, yesterday our Director, Mr. Ildefenso Solé Morales, "senator for Guayama and secretary general of the Popular Democratic Party, expressed his solidarity with the editorial of EL MUNDO that discussed the Rio Piedras case. Expressing the hope that "hopefully those who should understand it will understand it", Mr. Solé Morales commented on the political turmoil in Rio Piedras as follows: "I wish to express my solidarity with your editorial entitled El Jaleo de Rio Piedras. We maintain that the principle set forth in the referred editorial is one of our obligations in public life. Elections place on the shoulders of the people who receive the public trust the unavoidable duty to dedicate all their time to solve the problems that confront the different communities that exist within our governmental organization. (Continued on Page 16 Col. 3) " I-■ I I ■>- - . (PU) - The New York Board of Education is making every effort to assist Puerto Ricans and their parents in their assimilation problems in the social and educational life of the city. In a report prepared by Mark A. C. MacLoakey, director of the Division of Community Education, entitled "Report of the Board of Education on the Program for the Integration of the Puerto Rican Population into the Educational Life of New York City," Mr. MacLoakey states: "All Puerto Rican children in the elementary grades receive separate instruction for one and one-half hours each day in elementary subjects. In areas densely populated by Puerto Ricans, classes have been set" at a maximum of 25. Nineteen teachers devote all their time to English problems. "Thirty-seven additional teachers have been assigned to thirteen public schools (Contlnued on p. 16, col. 7).
ILDEFONSO SOLA MORALES Ledo, Santana Serves In Office Of Attorney General Géifd Polanco' Left For Washington Yesterday. Many Others Absent By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Cario" Saltana Becerra, attorney of the Department of Justice, serves as of yesterday as Acting Attorney General, in the absence of Vicente Gélgel Polanco, who yesterday left for the federal capital. Numerous high-ranking officials of the Department of Justice are currently away from their posts, either on vacation or in the United States on official business of the Department of Justice. In addition to! Chief of Justice, also absent is "1 First Assistant Attorney General, Lic. José Trías Monge, whom the prl. mero will join in Washington for an Important issue raised before the National Supreme Court. The Special Prosecutor! Geneca!, Ueen. dado José C, Aponte, "e está en Nueva York, desde hace varia" semana", representando al Gobier. no de Puerto Rico en la vista contra la Strato Freight, complicada (Continued on p. 16 Col. 4) '
Many Curious Onlookers Watched Total Lunar Eclipse Recorded Thursday From Rooftops
■I WMiMwr wHB WfflB 1 ■' BBsí v 1 Bk B II J II II Rs Ir h Wl ■ ik k 5 kH Bk w Bu 9 Nuestep graphic editor Luis de Casenave captured with his 1en- yeron camera that night, he was able to capture its development in these eight photographs, The photographs, from the College of Natural Sciences of the University of Puerto Rico, show the development of the total lunar eclipse on the night of Thursday night, giving an idea of the different phases of the phenomenon. (Photographs from EL MUNDO, by Casenave). In spite of the many clouds and small showers described in our columns yesterday by Dr. Facundo Bueso, from
The total lunar eclipse recorded on Thursday night aroused great interest and curiosity in the metropolitan area. Many people took to the rooftops to contemplate the celestial phenomenon.
celestial phenomenon. In the city of Rio Piedras, there were also many spectators. Numerous university students watched the lunar ecllp* os until late in the night.
night. The eclipse was yesterday the subject of discussion in some of the physical science classes of our first teaching center. According to the astronomical predictions of the Dean of Natural
Natural" Science" of the Unlvtr* aldad, Dr. Facundo Buaao, the ecllpae entered its initial phase at about eight o'clock in the evening. At fifty minutes past seven o'clock the first contact of the moon with 1" penumbra occurred.
While the moon was in the penumbra, it reduced its brightness, but not very sharply. At 4.7 minutes past nine, the first contact with the umbra occurred,
producing the pardal eclipse. At 19.5 minutes past ten o'clock, the lunar disk was absolutely eclipsed, and at 56.4 minutes past ten o'clock, the first contact with the umbra occurred, producing the pardal eclipse.
Benítez Orienta i , Al Estudiantado miCSSSSIMSIMB "MCI "m "M Cree Habrá Necesidad 1 De Suspender el Plan De Becas al Exterior ; Por Lula Hernández Aquino Redactor de EL MUNDO In a meeting of the Círculo da, Prtmédlcos de la UPR, al Recto/ a tía dicho centro docente, licenciado Jalma Benítez, conteitó en foro !m" provided a number of questions" from" students" about the operation of the School of Medicine of Puerto Rico. The Chancellor said that scholarships for students to study medicine outside Puerto Rico would probably not be continued, "assuring that the School of Medicine will be established here, at great cost to the public, The meeting, which was attended by about 150 students, was very lively, and was attended by about 150 students, and was attended by about 150 students. The aefior Benitez spoke about the antecedents of the School of Medicine, referring to the commission he made "in 1913 to Dr. D" La Pila, Co" ta Mandry and Suarez, to make a preliminary study, and later referred to all the efforts that have been made in favor of the school. Alfredo Flgarodo, president of the UPR Pre-medical Circle, introduced the Rector, of whom he said: "He has been working for several years for Puerto Rico to have a School of Medicine and his efforts have been crowned with the greatest success. He said: "The Rector has always worked to make our University a center of learning that is the pride of Puerto Rico. I believe, comrade, that he has achieved it". In his speech to the students, the Rector said that there are three things that make a good medical school: good teachers, good physical facilities and laboratories, and good students, and he believes that the first two will be provided to the UPR and the last one to the students. Referring to how loa maeatroa of the Eacuela are going to be, Mr. Benítez said: "First of all they have to be teachers. The UPR School of Medicine has to be one whose faculty is dedicated exclusively in the first two years of basic sciences, to teaching, and they have to be people who know what they are about. He said they had to be people with teaching experience, being one of the reasons why a substantial number of the school's initial faculty will come da endrá '' pon " ut "- had previously had a medical school, not having, consequently, professor#" of experience to teach subject" da medicine." ■ Also said the Rector; "There are teaching personnel in our School of Tropical Medicine and here among our scholarship" usable"; deeds then so aprovschsránj but I want to be perfectly frank and honest, we have the comproM , c ÍÍL p ? We have the obligation to guarantee to ourselves, to the University, to the students and to the country, that this will happen and that it will happen immediately. And how soon? I can never be able to graduate a class. The national exams taken after the second year of medical school will also be taken by four new students. And they will pass! I speak with such certainty because #1 they could not pass them, they would not enter the school in the first term. No Se Multiplicarán Médíeoe E " <*- "u talk said (Continued on P. 16 Col. 8) Congratulation to Olmo EL MUNDO cunó yesterday "I following cablggroma to Luis Rodriguez Olmo: ''Luis Olmo, Dodger" Brooklyn. - Puerto Rico's news team congratulates him heartily for the hit we've all been waiting for. Tough on them, Jíbaro! - THE WORLD/
Aqueduct Program Discussed
Cuevas Projected Expenditure "3,725,000
Makes Distribution To 27 Municipalities. - PEG Requests 81,175,000
During the first year of the Seventh Six-Year Economic Program, the Aqueduct Authority plans to invest 83,725,000 of its own funds for the first year of the program. 000, from its own funds, to improve urban aqueducts. This was reported yesterday by Mr. José R. Noguera". Head of the Finance Division of the Prasa Board," that in his report, Mr. Sergio Cuevas * Bustamante, director of Prasa, made the proviso that some municipalities that do not appear in the list below, have projects for improvements in their aqueducts, which are still pending, and whose studies are being worked on. Aslmlsmp sefior Cuevas Bustamante informs " the Board that the amounts allocated may vary according to certain technical specifications". Aqueduct" Urbanna The urban aqueducts to be improved with the Aqueduct Authority's own funds," according to the program submitted to the Board by sefior Sergio Cueva" Bustamante, are the following: Metropolitan Aqueduct-1 no, $1,900,000; Toa Alta, $10,000; Utuado, $174,000; Quehradilla", $50,000; Lare", $126,000; Camuy-Hatillo, $46,000; Arecibo, $200,000; Jayuya, $19,000; Isabela, $46,000; Sabana Grande, $116,000; San Sebastián, $152,000; Afta "co. $75.000; Mayagüez, $250,000; Las María", $39,000; Ponce, $150,000; Guayama, $29,000; Coamo, $113,000; Villalba, $53,000; Juana Díaz. 36,000; Barranqulta, $32,000; Patillas, $8,000; Cayey, $30,000; Junco, $46,000; Náguabo, $41,000; Agua Buena, $65,000; Ceiba, $24,000; L'a Piedra, $30,000. Rural Aqueduct The Aqueduct Authority, in the program submitted to the Planning Board for the Seventh Economic Program, does not make any provision for the rural aqueduct. He merely requested that $600,000 be allocated from the Island Government's general fund for these purposes. In addition, Mr. Noguera informed that the Emergency War Program has requested the sum of $1,175,000 for the first year of the Seventh Economic Program. This "urn would be used by the PEG as follows: $400,000 for operating expenses; $175,000 for Nursery Schools and $600,000 for Milk Stations, As for construction work, the PEG leaves the "1" Board of Plans to determine the allocation of funds to be used for these purposes. The "administrative hearings to consider the needs of the Department of Justice and the Insular Fire Service" were suspended.