THE MONDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND TODAY. - Partly cloudy today and tonight, becoming occasionally cloudy, with scattered showers this afternoon and evening, IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY. - High, SI degrees; low, 74. Barometric pressure at 4:80 p.m., 30.04 inches of mercury. "
NEW YORK, April 15.(PU). - In the afternoon today the following temperatures will be reported: Chicago, 35; Miami, Mi; New York, "5 and WAshIngtnn, 84. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities; partly cloudy, windy" mee strong than today, much colder also. Temperature higher, near sixty.
DAILY TOMORROW
FIVE CENTS
YEAR XXX
Entered ai second daos matter. Poet Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 16, 1949 NUMBER 13637
4 Popular Members Leave House; Reorganization Bill Passes Senate
NoConfirm F. Villamil, Ledo. Acosta
The appointments of Mariano Acosta Velarde, for President of the Insular Police Commission, and Fernando Villamil for member of the same Commission, were not confirmed by the Senate. *For more than three hours, the Senate Nominations Committee discussed the 277 appointments sent by the Governor for approval or rejection. The Committee rejected the appointments of Mr. Acosta Velarde and Mr. Fernando Vlllamll- with the abstaining vote of Senator Ernesto Juan Fonfrlas- leaving them on the table for consideration on the floor. Also on the table were the appointments of Eduardo Laureano Rosa, Mayor of Morovis; Primitivo Casiano, first lieutenant of the Insular Police; Enrique Maldonado, second lieutenant of the Insular Police; Juan del Tnro Irizarry, second lieutenant of the Insular Police. Appointments Confirmed The following appointments were confirmed by the Senate: "Jesús A. González, General District Judge; Joaquín Correa Suárez, General District Judge; Willis A. Ramos Vázquez, General District Judge; Guillermo A. Gil, Special Prosecutor General; Lorenzo Lagunga, Special Prosecutor General; Lorenzo Lagunga, Special Prosecutor General. Gil, Special Prosecutor General; Lorenzo Lagarde Garcés, Attorney General; Angel Fiol Negrón, Maya- | güez District Judge; Baldomero Freyre, San Juan District Attorney; William Morales Torres, Ponce District Attorney: Felipe Marcha nd, Mayagüez District Attorney: Santiago Fórrate Doria, Arecibo District Attorney: Julio Fernández Cabrera, Aguadilla District Attorney; Zoilo Dueño González, San Juan Assistant District Attorney; J. M, Almodóvar Acevedo, Assistant District Attorney for the District of San Juan. Rafael Padró Parés, Assistant District Attorney of the District of San Juan; Ernesto Mieres Calimano, Assistant District Attorney of the District of San Juan. Angel Viera Martínez, Assistant District Attorney, San Juan District; Arturo Ontrón García, Assistant District Attorney, Ponce District; Efrain Ruiz 'Laabes, Assistant District Attorney, Arecibo District; Lili González, Clerk, San Juan District Court, Civil Division. José I. Ruiz, Clerk, Ponce District Court; Aureo Sánchez Pérez, Marshal, Aguadilla District Court; Manuel García Meléndez, Marshal, Humacao District Court. Fren Vizcarrondo, General Municipal Judge; Antonio J. Bennazar, General Municipal Judge; Ricardo Calde, General Municipal Judge; Alma Delgado, Judge, Municipal Court of the Capital. Chamber II; Rolando Martinez Ramirez, Judge, Tribunal de la Capital. Room IV; Fernándo Vizcarrondo Vázquez, Municipal Judge of the Capital. Courtroom IV; Celestino Benitez, Judge, Ponce Municipal Court, Courtroom I; Pedro E. Muñiz, Judge, Ponce Municipal Court, Courtroom II; Margarita Seljo. Judge, Aguadilla Municipal Court. Courtroom II; William Santana, Short Municipal Judge of Rio Piedras, Courtroom I; Gustavo Cruzado Pujols, Judge, Municipal Court of Rio Piedras. Courtroom II. More Judges José E. González. Judge Municipal Court of Caguas. Courtroom II; Osar Bohonis, Short Municipal Judge of Bayamon; Belford Torres. Carolina Municipal Court Judge; José Julio Santiago. Judge Municipal Court of Cayey; Gerardo Correlra Más, Judge Municipal Court of Coamo; Rubén Pérez Pórtela, Judge Short Municipal Court of Camuy; Carlos M. Dávila, Salinas Municipal Short Court Judge; Eduardo Negrón Benitez, San Sebastián Municipal Court Judge; Ferdinand Padrón, Adjuntas Municipal Short Court Judge; Gerardo Almeda Aponte, Yabucoa Municipal Court Judge; Ismael Martinez Cancel, Secretary, Municipal Court of the Capital, Court II; Julio Pantoja Mattel, Secretary, Municipal Court of the Capital. Court VII; José Plftelro Vélez, Secretary, Municipal Court of Aguadilla, Court II. Jalma Furnelli, Clerk. Municipal Court of Guayama; José Estrada Avila, Secretary, Municipal Court of Bayamón; Cruz Francisco Padilla. Secretary Municipal Court of Camuy; Sergio Torres Garda. Secretary of the Municipal Court of Guayana; Nicolás Jiménez. Secretary of the Municipal Court of Orocovis; Josí R. Medina, Secretary of the Municipal Court of Caguas. Court I; Luis H Diaz. Clerk of the Cabo Rojo Municipal Court: Mariano Vale. Mársha Municipal Court of AguadUla, Salí (Cont. on page 16, Col. 6).
By ". GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Senate of Puerto Rico re'chazr any Intervention, "of any kind or with any motive, which without the authorization of our people, seeks to in- ' mlsculr in political, economic or social relations with the people of the United States." For the purpose of defining the position of the Insular Government in relation to the agreements reached at the Conference on Colonies 'and Dependent Territories, held in Havana, Cuba. and attended by thirteen Latin American countries, the Senate approved a Concurrent Resolution on Thursday night. No Petition Has Been Made It is stated in the Concurrent Resolution, to the Latin American countries which met in Havana, that the People of Puerto Rico understand that at any time they democratically express to the Congress of the United States their will to constitute themselves as a nation separated from the Union, Father Sanchez Made an Attack on Communism Superior of Mercedario" Said the "Seven Words in Cathedral Yesterday Evening By Enrique Ramirez Brau Staff Writer of EL MUNDO From the pulpit of the Cathedral Church of San Juan, in his sermon of the Seven Words, Father Ildefonso Sanchez, Superior of the Mercedario Fathers, said the "Seven Words in Cathedral Yesterday Evening By Enrique Ramirez Brau Staff Writer of EL MUNDO From the pulpit of the Cathedral Church of San Juan, in his sermon of the Seven Words, Father Ildefonso Sanchez. Sanchez, Superior of the Mercedarian Fathers of Puerto Rico, attacked communism as a denial of all Christian sentiment. Father Sanchez, with the church filled from boat to boat, and in front of the main altar, on which was placed the Crucifixion and next to it, the image of the Virgin covered with a black ribbon, faithfully interpreted the Seven Words of the Lord. In clear style and with simple words, the priest began his sermon by saying that "true love is always compassionate. He gave all he had" and went on to declare that "we are in the midst of a dreadful war". He attacked the Reds, "the communist danger that threatens religion." There is no need to turn our eyes to Spain," he said, "to realize what the Communists are, how the bishops were persecuted, how the Churches were destroyed!" We must study, he added, the history of Russia to know what I saw communism. "We must have religion in. school at home, everywhere for there to be peace. There is no peace today as long as" k. Igle "ia be perse(Contlnú" on page 21 Col. 7).
By M. NIEVES RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO Lieutenant Benigno Soto, commander of 'a Detective of the metropolitan area, in a letter addressed to our Director, Mr. Pablo Vargas Badillo, denies that the Detective had assaulted Carmen Rosa Rodriguez in the company of her son, or that she had been assaulted by any agent as alleged by the accused. For her part, Carmen Roía Rodríguez, in a sworn statement made before the judge of the Municipal Court of San Juan, Francisco M. Monserrate, corroborates in all its parts, the terms of her statement before Judge Monserrate, as well as the statements made by this editor, which were published in a timely manner in EL MUNDO: "In "1 number corresponding to Tuesday, April 12, 1949, of the newspaper d" your worthy address, under the fotografío do the woman Carmon .Rosa Rodriguez, appears information relating to the an esto of the same, by the Detective, and the arrest do the iridlviduoa Juan Bautista
Senate Repudiates Action in Cuba Rejects All Foreign Intervention in Island's Relations with the U.S.
The people of Puerto Rico have deliberately made no such request. The text of this Concurrent Resolution was discussed at length, for more than two hours, in a meeting held in the office of the President of the Senate, in which were present the following senators: Samuel R. Quiñones, Víctor Gutiérrez Franqui, Ernesto Ramos Antonin! and Benjamín Ortiz. The author of the Resolution, Senator Víctor Gutiérrez Franqui. He informed that the purpose of the same is "to dissipate all the doubts that may exist about the relations that unite the people of the United States of America with the people of Puerto Rico". Text of the Resolution The complete text of the Resolution approved by the Senate is the following: "Whereas, in the recent conference of thirteen Latin American countries, held in Havana, Cuba, it was believed that the United States of America and Puerto Rico are united in their relations. Havana, Cuba, it has been deemed advisable to assume Jurisdiction "o(Continued on page 20 Cnl.l) House Calls Disrespectful Letter From Long Was Addressed To Chairman Of Committee That Investigated k Caparra, Puerto Nuevo The House rejected yesterday, as disrespectful, a stiff letter from Mr. L. D. Long to the Chairman of the Committee that Investigated k Caparra, Puerto Nuevo The House rejected yesterday, as disrespectful, a stiff letter from Mr. L. D. Long to the Chairman of the Committee that Investigated k Caparra, Puerto Nuevo, Puerto Rico. D. Long to Representative Rubén Gaztambide Arrlllaga. who chairs a committee of that body investigating the construction of the Caparra Heights and Puerto Nuevo developments. Mr. Long's letter, which provoked the pronouncement of the House, accuses Mr. Gaztambide Arrlllaga of having acted with political purposes" in intervening in the investigation. - The question of the letter referred to gave rise to an Incident in the session of the Chamber on Thursday, with Mr. Gaztambide Arrlllaga and Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa intervening in it. After explaining the way in which he has been conducting the In. vestlgaclón. of the Caparra Heights and Puerto Nuevo urbanizations, Mr. Gaztambide-Arrlllaga stated that from what was reported by the people who have bought houses in the mentioned neighborhoods, he believed that they were not satisfied with Mr. Long". Figueroa Says Fué Imparcial Manifiesta la Cámara en su pro. nunclamlento que de no estar tan cerca el cierre de la sesión legislativa hubiera citada por desacato al señor Long, por la ofensa gra "Continued on page 21 Col. 6)
Babies Incarcerated Detective Says He Didn't Hit Woman; She Swears He Did
Campudosls and Francisco Colón Rivera, accused of the crime of petty theft, and since part of the information gathered by the reporter of this newspaper does not conform to the truth, I believe it is my duty to make the corresponding clarification so that the reading public may know the truth regarding the arrest of said Carmen Ruta Rodríguez. "Previous complaint produced by "l continenta. Charles Post, marine meercaatw, was brought to the Metropolitan Zone Detectives Post, in Puerta de Tierra, the woman of angry life Carmen Rosa Rodriguez, or interrogated she was, manifested to have been the author of the theft of fifteen dollars of the property of the referred Mr. Pon while both were in a room of a hotel of San Juan. "This woman when she was detained near her house in La Perla de San Juan and brought to this Detectives Post presented contusions on her face near one eye and on the left cheekbone, alleging that it was her common-law husband, Juan Campudosis flautist, and the individual Francisco Colón Rivera, who assaulted her to take the money she stole. Detectives of this local police station (Cont. on page 20, CoL 4).
Chambers To Meet Again Today Senate Approves Beer Tax Canned Beer Would Pay $1.50 Gallon. Oath on Payroll Eliminated" Pnr B. C.AtVEZMATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Senate was unable to finish its work in the early hours of Friday morning, according to the plans it had drawn up, and was forced to recess until three o'clock in the afternoon of Friday (which will be understood to be today, Saturday) in order to comply with the provisions of the Charter. Important legislation was passed throughout the day and Thursday night, including several bills of interest to different government "chiefs" and officials. The pnslllós and the hemicycle of the Senate were constantly "invaded" by a legion of "funcionlos" that managed the approval of the projects, "Among others, the Attorney General, Vicente Géfgel Polando; the Treasurer, Sol Luis Descartes; the Commissioner of the Interior, Jorge J. Jiménez; the Budget Chief, Roberto de Jesús; the Director of the Transportation Authority, Salvador V. Caro; the Commissioner of Labor, Fernando Sierra Berdecía; officials of the Planning Board, the Department of Education and other agencies and departments of the Insular Government were there until late at night. Beer Tax The P. de la C. M6 was approved, providing that a tax of one dollar and fifty cents per gallon measure, and a tax proportionate to the same rate, on traction per gallon measure, will be levied on all beer, lager beer, ale, malt extract and other analogous fermented or non-fermented products, whose alcoholic content exceeds one and a half percent by volume, and which is sold in metal containers containing less than five gallons measure. Oaths are eliminated Upon the Governor's signature of P. S. 909, which amends Section 24 of Act 74, entitled "Act to Provide Revenues for the People of Puerto Rico, it will not be necessary to take an oath before a lawyer" or "noLirio", when filling out the In-come-Tax form. The bill provides that "each individual" shall file a signed statement in which it shall be stated or in connection with which it shall be affirmed in writing, that it is made under the penalties of perjury, specifically demonstrating the "gross income" and the "deductions and credits admtalble" by virtue of this tax", As it is currently known, these forms must be signed under oath before an Internal Revenue agent of the Island Government, eliminating this provision. The P. del S. (Continued "n la pag. 16 col. 1) was also approved.
Gives Governor Powers to Do It / Includes All Government Agencies Muñoz Could Abolish, ConBolish or Modify Tra" Submit to House" Early Thursday morning the Senate approved the bill conferring on the Governor powers for the reorganization of the Insular Government Agencies and the Executive Departments. These powers, conferred upon the Governor upon third reading of S. P. 47G, will expire on February 11, 1952. Before giving it its approval the Senate. It introduced numerous amendments to the bill, among them one to include the Puerto Rico Water Supply and Sewerage Authority, Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Waterworks Authority, Transportation Authority. Land Authority, Households Authority, Communications Authority, Industrial Development Company. Government Development Bank. Supply Administration and the Agricultural Company. It is provided in the amendment that these powers shall not include the Government of the Capital, nor the municipalities of Puerto Rico. Text of the Bill The Reorganization Bill, after amendment by the Senate, was approved as follows: Definitions "Article 2-(ai Agency-, When the term "agency" is used in this Act, it means any agency, authority, company, service, bureau, division, office, commission, commission, board, instrumentality, public corporation, administration, independent establishment, function, and any other agency or agency of the executive branch of the Insular Government, including, but not limited to, the Puerto Rico Waterworks Authority, the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Service, the Puerto Rico Water Supply Authority, the Puerto Rico Sewerage Authority, the Puerto Rico Water and Sewer Service, and the Puerto Rico Water and Sewer Service, and any other agency or agency of the executive branch of the Insular Government. (b) Reorganization - For purposes of this Act, the term "reorganization" means any transfer, consolidation, coordination, modification, abolition, and reorganization referred to in Section 4, except that it shall not include the municipalities or the Government of the Capital, and shall not include the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company, (b) Reorganization. except that it does not mean "abolition" or "consolidation" when such term is used in relation to the executive departments, the office of the Auditor, the office of the Executive Secretary and the Public Service Commission. z Article 3 -(a) The Governor shall review and from time to time reexamine the organization of all "agency" and executive departments of the Government and determine what changes are necessary to achieve the following purposes: (continued on page 21 Col. 3)
■ K ' - * Ja *- ■ ' - ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ - x Rh v HL y r 4 * JU1J HHHBflnEMF a ii t Carmen Rosa Rodrigues appears here with the son who accompanied her to jail and shared the prison with her for the space of three days.
SKI ■ M ■ km A 1 HKHK* ? K PEDRO VEGA BERRIOS MANUEL ACEVEDO ROSARIO 4|Éjk ■ ■ ■ A h FRANCISCO SANCHEZ CARLOS M. RABARSA I, , in I - - - ----■■■ Dr. Morales Otero Remains Cesante Si Muñoz A Probationary Project Faculty of School of Tropical Medicine to Discuss Measure at Meeting on Monday Next Monday the Faculty d* the School of Tropical Medicine, composed of 35 physicians and technicians, will meet to discuss the p?The faculty of the School of Tropical Medicine, composed of 35 physicians and technicians, will meet next Monday to discuss the problem created for them by the passage of Senate Bill 493, which disassociates the school from Columbia University.
The Director of the School of Tropical Medicine, Dr. Pablo Mo. tales Otero, did not want to authorize in. formation regarding the attitude he will assume, however he said that "with the approval of the bill the agreement established with Columbia University, which is the one that nominates me, is broken," He also stated that he has not announced, and "that when Governor Muñoz Marín signs the bill, if it is approved by the Lower House, he will automatically be out of office." The Faculty Opposed As our readers know, the full Faculty of the School of Tropical Medicine submitted a me. morial to the Senate opposing the bill of reference, The memorial was read by Dr. Ramon M. Suarez at the hearing held in connection with the bill. According to the Faculty, "the medical divisions of the UPR are subject to a central authority, 1" Special Board of Trustees of the School of Tropical Medicine and the elimination of the Special Board of Trustees" is not necessary to "place the control of the School of Medicine under the Superior Council of Education." Other Allegations It was also alleged that the Faculty toward do" year" maintained the desirability of maintaining the affiliation of the School of Tropical Medicine with Columbia University. And finally, it was argued that "the establishment of a School of Medicine in Puerto Rico can be initiated without the need to verify the" changes proposed in the project.
t - --- Mayors Object to Pion On Centers Believe Right" Given To Health Commissioner Restricts Autonomy At its meeting on Thursday, the Mayors' Association, chaired by Felisa Rincón da 'Gautier. dl "cut the" government's" agreements for" the organization. It is '." opinion of Jos alcaldJ* ú u * the agreement, as it is iredac- । tado rtpresentirla a" reduction of municipal autonomy, since the Co T¡alonado de Salud appoint it to the directors, administrators and the" graduate nurses and auxiliary of said" center". Without the - Intervention of the mayors", It was agreed by the Mayors Association that the ten mayors affected would meet with a commission composed of mayors Modesto Ferrer, of Cidra: Cruz Cruz'Mu- ! ñoz. of Caguas; Joaquin Rosa, of Manat', Baulilio Vega, of MayaI güez; and Emilio Matos, of Cataño, to study the agreement prepared by the Commissioner of Health. I correct it, and if possible make a new one "that does not affect the interests of the municipalities", (Continued on page 20 Col. 3).
Two New Arrests Prompt Police Investigation
By M. NIEVES RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO -' Two new cases of "vicious arrest" have provoked an investigation decreed by the high ranking police officials, "on the terms of a letter addressed by Judge Francisco M. Monserrate, of the Municipal Court of San Juan, to Colonel Salvedor T. Roig. of the Insular Police . Before the judge Monserrate a young woman was taken last Thursday morning and a couple of grooms" about to be married, who were arrested by the police the night before, also appeared. The young woman of the first case, according to what she declared before the Judge, was talking with her boyfriend on a sidewalk of Fernandez Juncos Avenue, at the 11th stop of Miramar, in the vicinity of the house where she works,
when she was arrested "at 7:50 p.m. on April 13". M. on April 13," according to the complaint. The young woman, that according to the denunciation, was arrested alone "and her companion fled, was imprisoned during the night of Wednesday, being taken to the presence of the judge on Thursday morning, on the way to get married. The couple that is about to get married is formed by two young people of distinguished appearance, who were arrested" while waiting for a bus at the bus stop near Muñoz Rivera Park. shortly before eight o'clock in the evening. The couple was taken in the Folíela's cage to the San Juan Police Headquarters. They were released on the condition that they appear before a judge.
VegaBeiTÍos í Fué Primero ; Dejar Sesión I Acusó al Senado De Demorarar Bill Tras Incidente Expresó Equivalía a Retirarle Confianza, Le Siguen 3 Por Jnsé M. Gnrclo Cslderón Redactor de EL MUNDO Lo" representante" Pedro Vega Berrín", Francisco Sánchez. Car- ' lo" Rebussa and Manuel Acev<"do Rosario left the House session early Friday morning, after a violent incident in r| which Mr. Vega Berrios, speaker Ernesto Ramos Antoninl and majority floor lender Benjamin < Ortlz were actors. The Incident, which momentarily broke the cohesion among the nnem- . bina of 1" majority in the House, originated in the announcement made by r| Mr. Vega BerHo", in the sentida he that. relying on the Organic Charter, not to allow the approval of any Senate bill, without it being fully read. Vega Berrios informed that his attitude was due to the fact that the Senate stubbornly maintained its refusal to approve an appropriation of $15,000 for the construction of a bridge, to replace the one called Fuente Válqourt, of Ir-la Verde. He added that the bill for the above purpose had been prepared by the Commissioner of the Interior at the instance of the House Labor Committee, which had studied the controversy between the owners of the Valcourt Bridge and the drivers and citizens who travel on the bridge between Boca-Cangrejos and Calle Lolzn. He went on to say that Valcourt was a rich man, and had been charging $500 a day for the use of the bridge. No Me Compra Nadie "I," Vega Berrios continued, "am a poor man. My only capital is my name, and I cannot but insist that the allocation of the Valcourt Bridge is "proven so that there can be no suspicion" that the powerful can reach this House. In the Senate there is no desire to pass the prp- | yecto and I. propose. ampara- I do by the Charter, not J to permit the passage of any H provecto de| Senado until s® ' approves there the appropriation of the 1 Valcourt bridge." Vega Birlos' remarks being finished, the secretary riló ¡ lectura én Total Commission, to the title uH Senate Bill 490, ! requesting Vega Berrío" to be . read the same. Ramos Antonini, from the floor, asked: "What is the bill about? The floor leader, Mr. Ortiz, answered: "game" of chance, and it belongs to the Administration. í: On contenting Mr. Ortlz. the Speaker decreed a short recess, . during which he conferred with the ? . I floor leader, the tra- ? ; low. Mr. Ortiz addressed the House, stating that there is no provision in the Constitution mandating that bills must be read in full; and made a motion that, in accordance with Rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure, Rule 12 be amended to eliminate the requirement for reading bills. Me Voted 131,000 Made h above motion. Vegt-. Berrioa rose in annoyance from "ir¡ desk, to state that au' right to ask 1 reading of the" ■measures oue were going to the House "- he spoke it given, not by the Rules, but, "131,000 workers who voted for me." . And he added: "If I'm stopped, my protest will live on until justice is done to me. This is not the time to promote this motion, which, if approved, would be tantamount to withdrawing my confidence"; the motion was put to a vote and was approved by a majority vote of 5 representatives. .nullifying the vote of Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa, of the statehood minority " s ': When the motion of Crbz. Vega Berrios stepped forward to the microphone and in an emphatic tone said that the act just performed by his colleagues constituted a withdrawal of confidence. He went on to say: "I announce to my fellow members of the Chamber that they can do whatever they want, but I will no longer act torturing my conscience. When once, on the occasion of the strike of the "master", I was required to vote for the anti-strike law, I said to the chief (Continued on p. 15 (Col. 1)