EL NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: Patchy to occasionally cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 79 degrees: low, 71 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.94 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, April 8. (PU) - In the afternoon today xa Reported the" titling" temperature": Chicago 48; Miami 77: New York M: SVÁxhingfon M. Predlrclone" for tomorrow in New York and neighboring" cludade"; weather good and "oleado. In the afternoon I began to cloud over. Temperature max high, near fifty-five. Vlentot moderatea from the north.
DIARIO De'^S®^ LA MAÑANA.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second clara matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY APRIL 9, 1949
NUMBER 136"31
FIVE CENTS
No More Public Car Licenses to be Issued
Bill Sent By La Fortaleza Another Bill Eliminates Independent Buses On 1st AT Pop Jn "á Routes M. Garda Calderón - EL MUNDO Staff Writer Yesterday, La Fortaleza sent to the House the text of bill number 1074, which orders the Commissioner of the Interior not to issue any more licenses for public cars. This measure, as explained yesterday by Rep. Benjamin Ortiz in the House session, will be approved "in order to prevent new automobiles from entering the public service", since it is considered that the number of these vehicles is already excessive. Also received in the House, sent by the Office of the Governor, were the texts of the bills eliminating the independent buses from the routes served by the Transportation Authority, and establishing fixed routes for automobiles and buses (plslcorre) P. In order to operate, the "pisicorre" guaguas and P.A. automobiles will require authorization from the Public Service Commission, which permits will be issued in agreement between the PSC and the Transportation Authority, and the persons who acquire them will have exclusive routes. The bill that provides for the elimination of the independent buses, assigns the Transportation Authority $1,000,000 for the acquisition of new buses. The elimination of the independent carriers-according to the information provided to the House by Representative Ortiz-will be done as the provisional permits granted by the Public Service Commission expire, and giving the carriers the opportunity to convert the investment made in their vehicles. This function will be in the hands of the Commission. Special Commissions In view of the fact that only a few days remain before the expiration of the term of the present legislative session, special commissions of the House and Senate will be appointed to study this legislation. -Representative Figueroa asked Representative Ortiz if any public hearing would be held on the legislation, receiving the answer that "the committees will study the whole problem", while implying that it was not necessary for a hearing to be held. The texts of the bills were sent to the House by Mr. Raúl Canelo, aide to Governor Lula Muñoz Marin, and were immediately sent to the Record Office to be added to the bills. The titles were filed on March 25, the date on which the legal term established by the Charter for the filing of projects expired. The Transportation Authority has requested $2,000,000 for the purchase of new buses and operating expenses, but the amount appropriated in the legislation before the House is $1,000,000, The House meeting began at 4:00 p.m., under page 12, Col. 3.)
Future "Lawyer" In "ayañ "u Labor Before the" Tribunale"
The graphic combination offered us several aspects of the "process" that for a crime of "antropofagia" was aired in the Practice Room of the College of Law of the University of Puerto Rico, and of which the newspaper gave ample information yesterday. At the top left, Judge Emilio S. Belaval, who presided over the hearing. On the right, the four "accused", convicted of the crime, students Héctor M. Muñoz, Tomás TUras Cortés, Juan Correa Toledo and Luia Rodríguez. Juan Correa Toledo and Luia Rodríguez Bou. Below, toward left, prosecutor Sarah Torrea Peralta in front of the jury that heard the case and rendered a "guilty verdict" for "aaeeinato en primer grado." On the right, defense attorney Lula A. Garrastegui in a moment of his presentation. In this case, Judge Belaval complied, with the utmost solemnity, with the jury's decision and declared the verdict formal, setting for Friday of next week the reading of the "sentence" of the four "defendants". The judge gave the defense attorney until that same date to file the motion for a new trial that he announced he would submit to the court. The public, made up of students, applauded the guilty verdict, something very rare in such circumstances. (Photos EL MUNDO)
Committees On Appraisal Appointed To Assist Treasury In Scientific Valuation Of Property On The Island The Treasurer of Puerto Rico is very pleased with the Supreme Court's fslln! The Treasury Department is prepared to initiate the scientific appraisal of property, with the help of private individuals and entities, The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, stated yesterday that he is very pleased with the ruling issued by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico declaring that the taxpayers are tributdhles, on behalf of the soelos, the undistributed profits of the civil societies. Supreme Court of Puerto Rico declaring that Jos. partners of civil partnerships are obliged to pay taxes on undistributed profits. Mr. Descartes stated that this was a triumph for the Treasury Department, which was the appellant in this case. Mr. Descartes informed that the work on the scientific appraisal of the taxation in Puerto Rico will begin shortly. (Cont. on page 12. Col. 6) Telefonica Hearing Continues Tuesday No Permanent Rate Still to be Discussed ('nn Call Limits* The hearing before the Public Service Commission on the rate increase petition of the Puerto Rico Telephone Company will be resumed next Tuesday at 9:00 a.m. The permanent rate requested by the Company will not be discussed. The permanent rate requested by the Company, which is not under discussion, will limit calls per month as follows: business telephone. 120 1lsmids; professional telephone, 110 call*: individual telephone, 85 calls; and residential telephones two in line, 65 calls. Additional calls will be charged an additional 3 cents each. Metered Service With the limitation of calls and the additional charge of 3 cents per call, in excess of the limit proposed as a fee against the basic telephone charge, metered telephone service would be established. However, this system will operate only in areas where there is automatic telephone service. According to Public Service Commission technicians, the Company's rate base as of December 31, 1947, was $6,500,000, or $1,084,000 less than the Company's estimate, This conclusion is favorable to the Company's customers because the MSMN rate must be determined in accordance with the Company's estimate.
Pinero Opposes Placing Tropical Medicine School Under UPR Board of Governors
At a meeting of the vht" held on the School of Medicine* project, Mr. Jeaúa T. Plñero, former governor of Puerto Rico, was of the opinion that the UPR would not be able to place the School of Tropical Medicine under the UPR's Board of Governors.
Tanker Recruits 18 Boricuas To Send 14 British Sailors To Their Homeland For Mutiny PONCE, April 8, -<By Miguel Rlvera, - 1.he police surveillance on board the English tanker Teak Wnori, anchored in Ponce Bay, established in connection with the outbreak of mutiny, ceased today at 3 o'clock in the afternoon, when the Shell Gasoline Company sent to its headquarters in San Juan, 14 of the ship's crewmen, to be returned to England via New York. Another crewman could not be returned because he was confined in a hospital in this city, and one more - completing the total number of 16 members of the tanker's crew - could not be located. As soon as one is discharged, and the other located, they will be sent by the same route to England, the cost of transportation of the sludge being paid by the company owning the ship, Jacobs. Yesterday, on receiving authorization from the Jacobs Company, the tanker's captain, Mr. Robin Pelee Openshaw, selected new Puerto Rican seamen - 18 men in all, two more than the number of English seamen left behind. They include stoker, steward, cook, assistant cook and other seamen. Captain Openshaw was in San Juan to-day, making arrangements with the island authorities for the formallzaclón of contracts and aulorlza(Continued on p. 14 Col. 8>
- Wb^MWP- y ■ M ■■ .1 ir 1 B * A, W \ r BHKbiB u A" A * ! - r A4aB93£|K¡V ■ r s - .... T -. t!-'Wr . .... ,A * JBWWWWB -B -BaB P -B- BOBB ' i .BBbK - ...-ABbBIBA w^B ■L**x fe "i* </: *.":!&
-1 if A ¿ .'óáBte* ¡: ■ sJB ¿ W*',' .£Hk? a W?" .3 ' RtxjB B ' WBmBBBBBBBBRBBBB'
clarando 'in yesterday afternoon. In the photo can be seen, among others, (on the left) don Jesus T. Plñero; rie back to the camera, the rector Jaime Benites and to the
dortor Leopoldo Flgiioron, <-! "t>nndor Hozadlo Rivcrn Colón and aenaúor Ernesto Carrasquillo. (Fofo EL MUNDO).
Senate Authorizes Publication of Justice Decisions in Spanish Rejects Iriarte Amendment to Also Include English Language. Other Measures Approved The Senate approved on third reading S. P. 6í'7, providing that the Attorney General's recommendations on measures to be adopted to improve the administration of justice in Puerto Rico be published in Spanish. Likewise, the bill amends Article 77 of the Political Code of Puerto Rico, substituting
rie Puerto Rico, substituting the name Attorney General for the name J-tovurarior General, and deleting the provision that lox infomus and opinionex of the Attorney General be published in English. Text of Amendment The amendment to Article 77 of the Political Code of Puerto Rico reads as follows: "The Attorney General shall report annually to the Governor on the status of the affairs of his department. Said report shall also contain the recommendations of the Attorney General on the measures to be adopted to improve the administration of justice in Puerto Rico. "The Attorney General shall publish annually in Spanish such opinions issued by him as he deems to be of general interest. Printed copies of such opinions shall be sent to each member of the Legislative Assembly, to the Governor and to each head of the executive departments and to all the justices and mayors of Puerto Rico, and copies of such opinions shall be sold at cost. The "'mador Celestino Triarte argued against the bill because it eliminated the provision that said opinions' be published in the English and Spanish languages, he said he did not see how the new amendment would benefit"' and requested that the English language be included in the provision. The motion made by Senator Iriarte was defeated, and the bill was approved with the amendment by Senator Bolivar Pacan that said reports be published annually. Other Bills" The Senate also approved on third reading the following bills: P. riel S 126, to transfer to the Insular Government the municipal road known as camino rie Rio Jue. yes dt-l Barrio San Ildefnnzo rie Coamo Puerto Rico, e] which is already roox'rulrio and affirmed, ordering to) Commissioner rie lo Interior the non.'ervaclón of said road, Cont. on p. 14-Col. 7
Gas Rates Lowered for April and May Due to Reduction in CninbuMiblc Price for Months Mentioned The Gas Railway Company has announced a reduction of $0.03 per thousand cubic feet for gas consumption as recorded by meter readings for April. The same reduction will apply to the consumption recorded by the meter readings for the month of May. This was reported to the Public Service Commission by Rico Gas & Coke Co. in a letter addressed to it on April 7. The decrease announced by the Company is due to the provision contained in the "Fuel Clause" of the lunfa rifa rie, by which it is obliged to report to the PSC on a regular basis the cost of its fuels (fuel oil, coal and hard coal). The rate was set at a cost of 52. 11 cents per thousand cubic feet of gas, which means that the Company has to invest 52.11 cents per thousand cubic feet of gas to produce 1.IMX) cubic feet of gas. According to the same clause, when the cost goes down or up $0.01 the Company has to readjust the tariff, as the case may be. In the month of April, fuels dropped $0.03, so the price per thousand cubic feet of gas, instead of being $1.98 net for the first 4,000 cubic feet, will be $1.95, net. Since, according to the Company, fuel oil has undergone a further reduction in price, the consumer will pay $0.03 less per thousand cubic feet for the month of May, i.e., instead of $1.95 net, he will pay $1.92 net.
At a public meeting held yesterday in the Senate caucus room, former Governor Jesut T. Plñero said that the bill to place the Tropical Medical School under the jurisdiction of the Board of Higher Education "is bad," and that he had learned of the bill from the press - P. 493 - and that he had been informed of it. He reiterated that "the project is bad". He said that he believes that the School of Medicine should function as an annex of the School of Tropical Medicine, as it was originally planned. He added that he is not interested, nor does he believe any legislator should be, in who the people who come to take charge of the School of Medicine are, but rather that those people enjoy the professional prestige necessary to make the School of Medicine a first class one, because this is what the people of Puerto Rico are interested in and what the people want. The Tulane Affair In response to questions from Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa, Piftero gave a history of his efforts to establish reiai cinncs with the University of Tuj lane when, as Governor, he was informed of the withdrawal of the University of Columbia, leaving for Washington, where he had a conference with the Resident Commissioner. He then communicated with Dr. Jose Padln, having learned that Columbia's withdrawal from the University spoke of the possibility of establishing relations with Tulane, and for this purpose he had an exchange of impressions with members of the faculty of Tu|ane. In this exchange of impressions, the guideline that could be followed to establish the understanding was outlined, counting on the legal action and the agreement of the Board of Trustees of the University of Puerto Rico. He referred to the fact that in one of the sections of the draft agreement submitted by Tulane, it refers to restrictive provisions imposed by a financial supporter of that institution. Such provisions are loaded with racial prejudice _ which invalidated any agreement with that university. Malean propaganda" Pinero referred to "unhealthy propaganda published by New York newspapers about Puerto Ricans residing in that city". To this end, he requested that a study of the situation in New York, in conjunction with Columbia University, be initiated. "The study was made by the Division of Social Relations of Columbia University and was given great publicity, cutting through the propaganda disseminated against the Puerto Ricans. । Dr. Figueroa asks the declarant if he believes that the School of Medicine could be established without hindering the operation of the School of Tropical Medicine. Piftero answers in the affirmative and says that he believes that in the lands occupied by the National Guard, the Weather Bureau, the Barbosa School and the Army laboratory, north of Muñoz Rivera Avenue, the School of Medicine could be established. That two studies were made, one by the University of Puerto Rico and the other by the Secretary of the American Medical Association. New" Studies He said that in spite of *e "to, someone was studying - investigating the tuna- ' to, having invited other" personalidxdes from abroad to give their opinion on the matter, having been favorably informed. Dr. Figueroa, deputized to assure Plñero "about his statement that the project was bad in spite of being of the Administration, said: "Don't you think that this project, which is bad, could be made less bad by eliminating everything that is related to the School of Tropical Medicine, so that it would say: 'in cooperation with the School of Tropical Medicine?The hearing ended at about 5 p.m. Speaking to the panel, Benitez argued that he was fighting the hierarchical dua' Jity that was trying to be established, while Piftero said he was fighting the project because it would eatableIy link it with Columbia Univer- ¡ sity.
Fennell's resignation accepted.
At its meeting, attended by all five members, the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Agricultural Company accepted the resignation submitted by the General Administrator of said government agency, Mr. Thomas E. Fennell. The resignation will be effective on April 15, as informed. The members of the Board of Directors are the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Ramón Colón Torres; the Director of the Budget Bureau, Mr. Roberto De Jesús; the Director of the Experimental Station, Mr. Ar* turo Roque; and Mr. Emilio Piñera and Mr. Juan Bennazor. In his resignation, according to our
I reports, Mr. Fennell stated ■ only that he was obliged " o abandon his position as General Admi- - nistrator of the Agricultural Company ■ because he had to attend to his personal interests (outside of ■ Puerto Rico). It was also reported that the reu1 nion had been held "on very cordial terms," and that no questions had been raised concerning the administration or work done by the resigning officer. r The Board of Directors, according to our reports, has not yet selected a successor to Mr. Fennell. It will possibly hold a further meeting next week to discuss this matter.
Claims Law Did Not Give TA Monopoly
Agency Said To Be Constitutional Cordovés Opjna Disbursements Can Be Made Without Auditor Intervention By Angei "cRlT77 CRUZ EL MUNDO Staff Writer In an important opinion issued yesterday, in which the power of the Puerto Rico Legislative Assembly to create public corporations is upheld, Judge Rnfaet Cordovéx Arana, of the San Juan District Court, upheld the constitutionality of the law that created the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, the aforementioned judge also held that the law that created the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority is constitutional. The decision upholds the power of government officials to disburse money without the prior intervention of the Auditor of Puerto Rico, The decision issued by Judge Cordovéa Arana deals with a petition for declaratory judgment requested by numerous independent bus owners in the metropolitan area, who challenged the constltuclonnlidarii of Lay number 125 of 1942, which created the Transportation Authority, as well as the authority of said Authority to establish a monopoly in transportation in the metropolitan area. Among other things, Judge Cordnvés Arana found the following facts proven: 1. The Transportation Authority and its Administrator claim to have, by virtue of the Transportation Authority Act, the exclusive monopoly on the transportation of passengers by motor vehicles (guaguas) in I" cíuriari rie 3nn .luán. The Public Service Commission holds the theory that the Autorldari has the exclusive monopoly of the transportation of passengers in buses in San Juan. For that reason the CSP s* has refused to grant* long term licenses to the demnndantas as public carriers, 3, The TA's funds are rie. posited in two private banks in Puerto Rico in the name of the Autorldari ríe Transnorte, and the Authority's funds which g|. ran against those deposits are "secured by bonds which in to. 4, Disbursements of funds invested by the Transnnspote Authority in passenger transportation operations are subject to the prior approval of the Puerto Rico Treasury, only intervening in such disbursements: The Board of Directors of the Authority, in approving the general budget of expenditures where the authorized items for various purposes appear; the General Administrator of the Authority, who approves the disbursements on the basis of vouchers; and the Auditor and the Treasurer of the Authority, who sign the vouchers and checks for disbursements. The Auditor of Puerto Rico has established the system of accounting by which the officials of the Authority are governed in making disbursements of funds of the Authority.
Island Invited to Three World Events
Bill Would Facilitate Education Plan They Will Try to Get Puerto Rico to Have Delegation to UNESCO. Puerto Rico to Have Delegation to UNESCO Pnr Benjamín Santana Editor of El. MUNDO Puerto Rico is invited to participate in fresh major international educational conferences, to expose the program of Education for the Community that has been carried out in the Island. If the Governor signs a bill approved by the Legislature, the program, which caused a "sensation" at a UNESCO conference held last week in Cleveland, will be carried out immediately with a $725,000 fund they have available. The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villlaronga, who attended the aforementioned conference by appointment of Governor Muñoz Marín, informed that steps are being taken to have the Foreign Relations Board authorize the] Exchange of educators and students with those of other countries, In presenting his report yesterday, he explained that there is an "ordinary oxtrv" demand to meet Puerto Rlro, as a result of the extensive publicity that has recently riled the island and prompted the inauguration of the first governor elected by the people. International Conferences During an interview with the delegation of Puerto Rico to the next Conference of the National Commission for the United States at UNESCO, Mr. Jorge Paxadre, director of Intellectual Cooperation of the Pan American Union in Washington, raised the advisability of the Island sending a representative to the next conference against illiteracy to be held in Rio de Janeiro next September. In addition to Commissioner Vlllarorga, the Cleveland conference was attended by Dr. Jose Padln. a member of the University's Console Superior de Enseñanza rie, and Professor Arturo Morales Cerrion, oufon teaches at Columbia University and is preparing there for o) Ph. The Rio Taneiro Conference, to be attended by the world's foremost leaders in pedagogy, will be attended by the world's foremost leaders in pedagogy, to agree on a vast plan for literacy in all fields, Puerto Rico was also invited to the organization of the International Association for Adult Education, to be held next summer in Copenhagen. The other conference, to which the University of Puerto Rico is invited, will be that of Hispanic American Unlversidaries, to be held in Guatemala next June. Puerto Rico and UNESC O Official representation of Puerto Rico on the U.S. National Commission for UNESCO is being considered. It is pointed out that this achievement would be of tremendous significance for the Island, since ex. through the national commissions of the different countries that the central organization of UNESCO in Paris generally operates, the inclusion of Puerto Rico in the National Commission would have a tremendous impact on the Island.