THE
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Medium cloudy to cloudy with occasional scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, 76 degrees; low, 72 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level. at .10 o'clock, 30.00 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, April H. (FU) - Today afternoon the following temperatures were recorded: Chicago, 66; New York, 30; Miami, 82; Wiahington, 80. Wind" moderate" from the southwest.
diary of the marana
XXX
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -
SATURDAY, APRIL 23, 1949
NUMBER 13644 FIVE CENTAVOS
Truman Submits Mandatory Health Insurance Plan; Senate Approves National Housing Program
Treasurer Ruled Against Abarca Case
Supreme Court Confirms Taxes Holds That Good Administration Should Not Be Taxed By Juan Martinos Chape! The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico has just ruled that property taxes cannot be increased because the management of such property or business is done in a manner that produces above-normal profits. The Supreme Court distinguishes, for assessment purposes, the value of a property because of its location and other favorable factors that make it more or less productive, from the value of a business whose efficient or deflated management causes it to produce a profit or loss. Disallowance System - This ruling causes the Treasury Department to disallow the system of increasing the assessment of property on the basis of the benefits that psoduco as a life factor. -** When the Treasurer assesses property for taxation purposes, no amount may be included in the assessment for the enlivening factor, according to a recent ruling by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. This ruling refers to a property assessment case for the year 1944-45. For that year, the DoparL&meñto J of the Treasury Department appraised the property (Sucesores do Abarca, Inc. corporation), detailing its own real and personal property. - The value of each property is shown in the following table. On the value of the amounts of these items, the amount of $56,112 was added to the appraisal, which was considered as an enlivening factor. The taxpayer appealed before the Tax Court requesting that the $56,112 considered as life factor be reduced from the assessment. On this point, the Tax Court ruled in favor of the taxpayer, ordering the Treasurer to "refrain from adding to the assessment, the $56,112 item, or any amount for the "life factor or enlivening factor". Treasurer Appealed The Treasurer of Puerto Rico appealed the decision to the Supreme Court. To determine what the Treasurer calls the "life factor" the Treasury Department uses the following system: It fixes the value of all properties, real or personal, of a corporation. It then determines the average profit the corporation has earned over a number of years, usually the last five years. It determines what it estimates to be a reasonable profit taking into account the value of the invested capital that produces it. If the profit is greater than the amount estimated to be reasonable, then the Treasury Department adds as a life factor an amount equal to the capital that would have to be invested additionally to produce that excess profit. Held Pallo - The Department of Revenue considers that machinery of a certain market value must be appraised at a higher amount if it produces a profit "in excess of that which it considers reasonable. The Supreme Court upheld the Cont at p. 16, Col. 3 Bill Would Raise Veterans' Pension by 25% Veterans to Discuss at Public Hearings Soon WASHINGTON, April 22 (FU)- The House Committee on Veterans' Affairs plans to consider soon a measure to increase veterans' compensation and pension checks by 25 percent, John E. Rankin (D-MI), chairman of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs, said in a statement. Rankin (D-Miolsfield), chairwoman of the Committee, said that public hearings on this measure and other bills affecting veterans will begin "as soon as the pension bill and some other minor, noncontroversial bills passed by the Senate have been considered. The Committee may complete its work on the Rankin pension measure next week.
Scene of the swearing-in ceremony held yesterday at the Department of Justice. From left to right: Obdulio Bauzá, who was sworn in as District Attorney of the 1st District Court of Guayama.
District Attorney of Guayama; Attorney General Vicente Gélgel Polanco; Víctor M. Sánchez Fernández, who was sworn in as prosecutor of the Investigation Division of the Guayama District Attorney's Office.
The Most Beautiful Office Clerk Will Be Elected Tomorrow Act Will Be Grand Opening at Santurce's Paramount Theater The moment awaited by the public of San Juan will arrive tomorrow night at 9:15 p.m., when the four winners of the contest "The Most Beautiful Office Clerk of San Juan" will be presented at the Paramount Theater. In order to make possible the announcement of the winning candidates by that time, voting will close after the matinee of the film, Secretary Confidential, the Harry Popkin production that inspired the contest. The Artistas Unidos Company and EL MUNDO, which jointly sponsor the beauty contest, have made special arrangements for a program to be held between the film presentations, which will begin at 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., respectively. Under the direction of Radio EL MUNDO's master of ceremonies, Fidel Cabrera, the Luii Cardona Orchestra, his electric violin and guitar will provide the musical background for the presentation of the winning candidates. The singer will be the well-known artist Guelin Andrades. After the presentation, the 10 semi-finalists will be guests of the Hoy Club, where the four winners will be presented with keys, making them honorary members of the club. The Luis Cardona Orchestra will once again offer the delights of their music so that the contestants can enjoy the music of the club, which will be presented to them as a gift.
The swearing-in ceremony was held at 2:00 p.m. at the office of the General Attorney, Lic. VícantA.JGélgel Polanco, before Judge Joaquin Suárez I Correa. "The ceremonies were brief and simple, and during them the two new officials thanked the Attorney General for the trust he has placed in them, while expressing their desire to serve in the best possible way in their respective positions. Obdulio Bauzá served during the last election period as representative for the district of Laron, Las Marias and Mari. eao. । At the conclusion of his term in the House of Representatives, the new Attorney General recruited him to fill one of the positions as prosecutor in the Division of Investigations and Criminal Matters. (In Guayama he will replace Licen- 1 ciado Herminio Miranda, Jr., who resigned several months ago from his position as prosecutor in the District Court of that locality to take up his private practice. Víctor Sánchez For. 1 nández resides in Vega Baja, but i for the last few years had this, blecldo his law office in Bayamón, of , of whose local Bar he is president., He now substitutes for Lic. Bauzá as prosecutor of the Division of 1 (Cent, on page 18, Col. 5)
Mystery in Real Life
By WILLIAM TUCKER ATLANTA, April 22. (PU) - Police today followed the few clues that turned up in the murder of a Metropolitan tenor without solving the case and began investigating his personal life for a possible motive. Dallas Police were asked to investigate a shoulder, who was either a member of the Met's ensemble or an ardent opera buff, who was considered an intimate friend of singer John Garrió. Garrió was found shot to death yesterday, in an Atlanta calliope. E. I. Holderbrand, detective superintendent, said police officers knew the name of the "friend," but refused to reveal it. He added that it had been said that the shoulder left the Biltmore hotel in this city about the same time as Garris left it. Garris was proposing to go to Memphis with the troupe on Thursday. His so-called friend would go directly to Dallas, where the troupe would perform tonight. But Garris set out on foot from the railroad station, and found the dead woman. The most logical clue to the focha - he reported that it was a blue Packard, with blue
The most logical clue to the death was that a blue Packard, with New York license plates and a blood-stained back seat, had been at a gas station yesterday and quickly faded away. Police discovered that the driver of the car had no lead. He explained that the blood came from a sick joint. Detectives believe Garris was killed elsewhere, possibly gangland style, in a car, and taken to the alley. Only a very strong shoulder or possibly two men could have lifted the body of the 17-pound singer, detectives said. New York City Atlants police officials obtained information that a shoulder named John Garris, who gave the singer's current address, was arrested on May 21, 1947, accused of wandering through a subway station at 4:45 a.m. He was released. He was released on a suspended sentence. The Fulton County investigator general questioned the singer's roommate and music teacher, Lutz P. Uhlfoidor, in New York.
Sworn in as prosecutors O. Bauzá and V. Sanchez Fernandez
p - ¿mF Su w --A; v - - a®* - -ó h',.,7 HL-
and Criminal Affairs of the Department; Senator Ernesto Juan Fonf rías and Judge Joaquín Correa Suárez, who took the oaths,
Ceremony Was Before Judge Suárez At The Attorney General's Offices
Bauzá To Serve In Guayama District Court; Sánchez In Criminal Division
Two new prosecutors were sworn in yesterday at the Department of Justice: Obdulio Bauzá as prosecutor of the Guayama District Court, and Víctor Sánchez Fernández as prosecutor of the Investigations and Criminal Affairs Division.
Pinero Talks About Island In Argentina Believes It Will Be 15 Years Before He Can Decide On Status BUENOS AIRES, April 22. - (PU) - The former governor of Puerto Rico, Jesús T. Plftero, declared today to Prensa Unida that his countrymen will not be in a position to decide whether or not to ask for independence until another ten or fifteen years have passed. Adding that 90 percent of the population believes that the Association with the United States has been beneficial to the Island, Plftero said that the prerequisite would be the industrialization of Puerto Rico before a plebiscite could be held to choose between full independence or joining the U.S. Union as another state. Internal Situation Referring to the internal situation of the island, Piñero said that the internal situation is the worst problem facing the government. He declined to comment on the situation, saying it was the worst problem facing the government.
Murder Of Opera Singer John Garris Offers Authorities Very Few Clues
Uhlfeldor, born Garris in Germany, said he could not help Webb much, because he knew of no enemy who could tenor ol tenor. Garrió was "very peaceful" and "friendly," Uhlfelder said. He did not deny having had a fistfight with his disciple. Lt. M. M. Coppongor and Dr. Horman Jonee, head of the city's Crime Laboratory, said they had questioned most of the 720 people aboard the two special trains carrying the Metropolitan's company. Coppongor said he determined that Garrir was found alive at 3 a.m. on Thursday. Within a few minutes of that time, however, he should have been dead, according to medical estimates. Garris' fellow artists considered him a sort of "lone wolf" from a social point of view, and did not often watch him between performances. But even after his death, Edward Johnson, general manager of the Metropolitan Opera, described the murder of singer John Garris as "very tragic and very unfortunate. Johnaon headed a group Cont on page 18, Col 7
5,000 Units To Be Allocated To Island
Total Appropriation Is Billion Lfi Project E's Luck" Still Uncertain In Lower House For WÍlTlam DorvUlier WASHINGTON, April 22 (Special to THE WORLD) - E! Senate last night passed a bill providing for the appropriation of more than $1 billion for a national slum clearance and low-cost rental housing construction program, which is estimated to provide for the construction of five thousand housing units in Puerto Rico, The measure, which authorizes a six-year program for slum clearance and the construction of 810,000 housing units, passed the House today, where its fate is uncertain. A general estimate of Puerto Rico's share of the program was made recently by an official of the National Public Housing Administration, who said that many unknown factors made it impossible to formulate anything but a "very general" estimate of about five thousand units for the island. Puerto Rico will receive equal shares with the various states in all provisions of the bill. Under the measure, as approved last night, the local home authority will undertake the construction of the projects, their maintenance and the collection of the revenues. All projects proposed for Puerto Rico and the island must be approved by the National Housing Authority. The Island Authority, or other municipal authorities, indicate the need for homes at low rental rates,' and that private enterprise does not meet the need. The project will not be approved unless the Housing Authority can demonstrate that there is a gap of at least twenty percent of the total amount of the project;The Senate adopted an amendment giving veterans of both wars a preference in obtaining new homes during the 45-year period covered by the bill. With a maximum of 810,000 units to be built in six years," the Senate provided for 135,000 to be built annually. The President may increase the number, however, up to two hundred thousand per year, with the stipulation that the 810,000 not be exceeded in the six years. It also provides for the 'appropriation of one billion dollars in federal loans: and. that of $500,000,000,000 in federal grants for the eli(Cont. on page 16, Col. 6)
Córdova Díaz Alleges San Juan Cannot Repeal Taxes
Cites Case in Which Supreme Court Condemned Double Taxation. - Mayor Does Not Know of Recommendation
Felisa Rincón de Gautier, the Administrator of the Capital, informed yesterday that she is unaware of the recommendation of the attorney of the Government of the Capital, Mr. Arcillo Alvaradd, to impose a municipal tax on all sales of electric refrigerators, automobile parts, radios, jewelry, perfumery and other articles that pay taxes to the Island Government. Mrs. Rincón de Gautier expressed that as soon as she has full knowledge of the aforementioned recommendation, she will express her opinion on the matter, since it is too premature for her to do so, due to her lack of knowledge of the case. The recommendation of Mr. Arcillo Alvarado for double taxation was motivated by a decision of Judge Rafael Cordovés Arana, of the District Court of San Juan, to the effect that, according to the law created by the Government of the Capital, double taxation is not prohibited, as it is prohibited by the Municipal Law, which provides that
Signed Bill Liberalizing the Payment System
Municipalities may not impose taxes on those items that pay taxes to the Insular Government, Córdova Díaz's Opinion Establishments that pay licensing fees under the Insular Internal Revenue Law are not obligated to pay any taxes for municipal patents, in the opinion of the legal advisor of the Federation of Commerce, Jorge L. Córdova Díaz, Esq. In connection with the opinion issued by Judge Rafael Cordovés Arana, regarding a municipal tax on several articles," Mr. Córdova Díaz cites Section 99 of the Internal Revenue Law, which states: "As of the day on which this law is approved, no municipal district or other administrative division of Puerto Rico may impose or collect any local tax or excise tax on any article subject to taxation under the provisions of this law. under the" provisions of this Act; provided, however, that nothing in this Act (Cont. on page 16, Col. 2") shall be construed to
Covers Merchandise Introduced in the Island. - Bill" Approved" Yesterday, the Governor of Puerjo Rico signed the "lgulsntsi bills: Senate Bill No. 837, Act 62, entitled "An Act to amend Sections 3 and 4 of Act No. 177 approved on May 11, 1938, entitled 'An Act providing for the necessary to acquire the properties located in the neighborhood of Puerta de Tierra, Municipality of San Juan. Puerto Rico, denominated 'Riera' and 'Miranda', to inhabit them by means of the appropriate urbanization for Industrial and commercial farms; providing for the sale in parcels of land to build a seawall and allocating the necessary funds, and for other purposes." Senate Bill No. 371, Act 63. "To amend Section 9 of the Act entitled 'An Act Prohibiting the Bearing of Arms,' approved on March 9, 1905, as amended by Act Njlm. 7 of March 17, 1942." / This law determines that the firearms seized shall be distributed by the Attorney General among the Departments whose employees are authorized to carry arms. House Bill No. 778, Act 64, "An Act to amend Section 10 of Act No. 4, approved on June 30', 1947; and for other purposes." House Bill No. 560. Act 65, "An Act to amend Section 60 of Act No. 6, approved on June 30, 1936, as amended" (Cont. on page 16, col. 4).
Corominas Gives Version On Island Case
Consideration of this has not been abandoned. Letter to Dr. Concepción By JOSE mTárcíacalderon Editor of El, MUNDO In a letter addressed to! President of the Independontlsta Party. Dr. Gilberto Concepción de Gradé, in relation to an information published in another newspaper of the Capital, attributing to him to have stated that "the American Commission of Dependent Territories has not definitively decided to consider the case of Puerto Rico", the Ambassador of the Argentine Republic to the Organization of American States, Mr. Enrique V. Corominas, qualifies the referred information as inaccurate. Mr. Corominas further states: "The American Commission on Dependent Territories considered itself competent to hear the case of Puerto Rico, in its historical location within the limits of the same, but taking into account the doubts that some representations expressed as to the applicability of the competence of the Commission, the so-called case of Puerto Rico, and as to whether the Resolution creating the American Commission on Dependent Territories at the IX International American Conference of Bogotá included it, it was precisely the Commission that decided, without suspending its work on the said question, that it was the Commission that decided, without suspending its work on the said question, that it would be the first to decide whether or not it was competent to hear the case of Puerto Rico, and that it was the first to decide whether or not the Resolution creating the American Commission on Dependent Territories at the IX International American Conference of Bogotá included it. without suspending its work on the said question, to refer the matter to the Council of the Organization of American States, in order to ascertain the opinion of that body, in which all the countries are represented (Cont. on page 20 - Col. 1).
I Hf \ 7 ®
John Garris, the ill-fated tenor of the Metropolitan Opera, was found dead in an alley in Atlanta, Georgia, the day before yesterday morning, and a dramatic death was found the day before yesterday.
The photo shows him with the papers he had obtained success during his theatrical career. The photo shows him bringing backstage last Tuesday, during the ropreeentacldn do Mignon, in the glad company of Giuaeppo Di
Stofano, who played the role of Wilhelm Meister (on the left) and Rio" Stejduns, who played the main role in the play. Garrió Unperooiió a Loarte.(Aioelada Press Photo)'. I ■
Would Be Paid For With Wage Tax
Would Create New Medical Schools Believed to Be Strongly Opposed by Physicians - President's Message By LEE" NICHOLS ' WASHINGTON, April 22 (FU)'- President Truman today pledged to Congress the establishment of a compulsory health insurance program, subsidized by payroll taxes, to give the people a prepaid right to the most modern medical care. He also recommended making increased federal funds available to help medical schools train more doctors, build more and larger hospitals, and assist the states in public health and disease prevention work. "Our objective," said Mr. Truman in a three-thousand-word message sent to the House and Senate, "must be twofold: to provide sufficient medical services to the poor to carry them forward and to see that everyone has a chance to obtain those services." Safe Opposition* His four-point plan is sure to receive strong opposition from several members of Congress and the National Medical Association. The NMA is already raising a $3,000/100 fund to fight ol program, which the organization calls "aociallized medicine." Senate and House members are adopting the same approach, and a fierce legislative fight is underway. James E. Murray, a Montana Democrat and chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Labor and Public Welfare, said a bill to implement the program will be introduced soon, and the committee will meet to plan public hearings. No Estimated Expenditures Mr. Truman made no estimate of the general gutoa, nor of the rate at which the' Wage Tax would be raised. He made recommendations only in general terms, stating clearly that he was willing to cooperate in the details to insure the early adoption of the "best possible plan." - Other Administration officials have advocated a contribution of one and one-half per cent on all workers covered by Social Security, with the employer being levied an equal contribution. They estimated the annual cost of the program at $6,500,000,000.000. The NMA says it will amount to between ten and eighteen billion dollars. President Truman said only that health insurance should be "based on the patrófi of our existing social insurance plans" and that it should "include as many people" as possible. Calls for Tax Increase The present social insurance program covers 37,000,000 workers and is subsidized by a contribution of one per cent tax on employees and employers alike. Mr. Truman has asked Congress to raise the contribution to one and one-half times the tax rate or to include an additional twenty million people under the program's benefits. Most of the president's speech was devoted to Mr. Truman's reasons for government intervention in the health field. "We live," said the President, "in an era of astonishing medical progress. But as medical care improves, it is also becoming more expensive." "The traditional method of paying for affordable care cannot meet today's medical needs. At the same time that our knowledge of the means of providing affordable care is at its peak, more and more people are unable to pay for it, Mother I Can Afford It "It is no longer only the poor who are unable to pay for all the affordable care they do not need: such care is now beyond the means of all but the highest-income group," he said that voluntary insurance plans have been "growing rapidly," but "unfortunately have proved inadequate to meet the need. He added that most voluntary plans provide "only limited coverage" against hospitalization expenses; and "most serious of all is that, because the rates do not match income," those that do not (Cont at p. 16, Col. 1)