THE WORLD
NEW YORK, Oct. "L (FU) - Ea this afternoon m reported the following temperatures: New York, 78; Chicago, 70; Wáshlngton, 76; Miami. 82. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring localities: eo" siderably cloudy and cool. Maximum temperature i 70. Winds variable and moderate.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Generally cloudy, with scattered showers and thunder during the afternoon and evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 85 degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.87 inches of mercury.
MASAKA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
Entered m second elaas matter. Post Office. San Juan, F. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1949
NUMBER 13822
FIVE CENTS
Government Raises Price of Coffee; Asks to Import It ■ . ■ ♦
Increase Will Be 3 to 4 * Cents a Pound Vicéns Ríos Says There is a Current Shortage. - GALVEZ MATURANA Radactor of EL MUNDO The Supply Administration believes necessary the Importation of den thousand quintals of coffee, according to the request elevated by this agenda to the Planning Board, to be included in the Seventh Economic Program of Seia Años. Mr. Antonio Vlcéns Ríos, Supply Administrator, bases his request on the low local coffee production, which according to him, has worsened due to the San Mateo storm storms that caused damages to the coffee plantations. The allocation requested by the Supply Manager is included with another for the importation of meats, and both amount to a total of $1,200,000. Price Increase Yesterday the General Supply Administration issued a new Administrative Order, revising the maximum price scales fixed for the sale of coffee in Puerto Rico, These have had to be increased, according to Mr. Vlcéns Ríos, "in relation to the economic factors prevailing at present for local production and supplies of coffee from abroad, with the purpose of stimulating production and seeing that it is self-sufficient for the consumption needs of the country." Mr. Vlcéns Ríos believes that in this way coffee imports from abroad are avoided, or reduced as much as possible. The Administrator of Supply added that the increase has been necessary due to the increase in the cost of production as a result of the scarce harvests that have been obtained, and other economic factors; and for having lost part of the current harvest with the winds that have recently hit the Island. Mr. Vlcéns Ríos also said that "the world shortage of coffee has considerably increased the value of this grain has been rising consecutively, quoting today in the New York stock exchange prices well above those fixed here for the product of Puerto Rico for similar coffees, from whose quotations the farmers of Puerto Rico could benefit if they were allowed to export". The Supply Administrator added that "the price to the consumer has been increased only in the minimum proportion to the increase decreed for the producers, and not in proportion to the increase that coffee has had in the world market." Three Cents My The increase decreed by the Supply Administration represents three cents more, per % pound, to the consumer than the average prices, in the current local market" - mind. In the grocery stores of the metropolitan area, coffee is currently priced at .48 cents per pound. Supply Management has now fixed the price for roasted coffee, beans or ground, at .51 per pound. New Prices j The new prices fixed by the Supply Administration, and which will take effect today, Saturday, October 22, are as follows: j Prime coffee, raw, dry and clean, in its parchment, wholesale to dealers and traders, $31.70 per 122 pounds; wholesale to retail roasters, $32.70 per 122 pounds. Prime coffee, raw, dry, clean and ground, $32 wholesale to dealers and traders for 100 lb.; $33.00 to retail roasters for 100 lb. and 36 cents to the consumer. Roasted coffee beans or ground: Zn containers larger than one free, $4.00 per 100 pounds wholesale to roasters and retailers; 51 cents (Continued on page 14, col. 2).
Half of Island Found Free of Tick Attacking Cattle
By Rurie" E. Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO As the campaign to eradicate the tick that causes Texan fever in cattle, horses and goats enters its third phase, more than half of the island of Puerto Rico, as well as the entire land area on the islands of Culebra and Vieques, have been free of the tick, with the exception of a few farms where infected cattle have been introduced clandestinely. According to information supplied yesterday to EL MUNDO by Dr. César Clavell, the work carried out to date by the Inspectors, which amounts to two million dollars, has been carried out with the exception of a few farms where infected cattle have been smuggled.
Owners Accuse Lewis Of Boycotting Meetings And Power Ambition By FRANK K. NOLL PITTSBURGH, Oct. 21 (PU) -The owners of the North and West mines broke off negotiations with the striking miners today, rejecting all the miners' demands for increases, and offering to renew the present contract. The breakdown of negotiations between the United Mine Workers and the Northern and Western owners at White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia, followed weeks of unsuccessful meetings as the Nation turned to the Government for action to end the strikes in the coal and steel industries. Mine owners accused miners' boss John L. Lewil of boycotting the meetings and engaging in "a mad rush for power" in the labor movement. Lewis left the meetings Tuesday to visit his mother in Springfield, Ill. He declined to comment on the mine owners' action. The stoppage was the beginning of a policy of firmness on the part of the owners. The owners have refused to accept Lewis' demands, which amount to 30 cents or 35 cents for each ton of coal mined. "We are leaving now, but as soon as you gentlemen are ready to renew the present contra(Continued on p. 14, col. 3) Guaguas Bring New Ventilation System Consists of Special Units. - The Transportation Authority will put into circulation next Monday fifteen of the new buses acquired by the agency. These buses will be assigned to the route from San Juan to Rio Piedras, and they will replace fifteen of the older, more deteriorated buses, which will be withdrawn from service. There are currently 24 of these units on the Island, and it is expected that next Thursday nine more of these units will be put into service. Special Model The Director of the Transportation Authority, Mr. Salvador V. Ca. ro, gave a demonstration yesterday to government officials and journalists of the new type of buses. This is a vehicle adapted to the needs of the climate of Puer. to Rico, with a special ventilation that remedies the defect of the old Twin Coach types in ser. vice on the Island, too hot for our climate. The acquired model, designed es. pecially, has at the front 8 fans, that working at layer, cldad produce 1,200 cubic feet of air, at a speed of 15 mi. lias per hour. In addition, these buses have four battery-operated fans on the roof, with a capacity of 2,000 cubic feet of air, which are controlled by the driver, who can regulate the speed of the fans, producing more or less air according to the speed of the fans. The driver can regulate their speed, producing more or less air according to the needs of the moment. Other Improvements In addition, the new type of buses acquired by the Transportation Authority have two fans which by means of a special system (Continued on page 14, col. 4).
The program, which has cost millions of dollars since it began in 1946, includes the removal of ticks from 350,000 head of cattle; 85,000 goats and 55,000 horses. Quarantine Zones The Island was divided into five quarantine zones, as follows: Eastern Zone, which began in Fajardo up to Carolina, and down from Carolina to Patillas, including the towns of Gurabo, San Lorenzo and Patillas. According to Dr. Clavell, it was here that the first stage of the campaign for the eradication of the claw began in 1946. (Continued on page 14, col 8). . ¿ r
Help Migrant Group in the U.S.
- Steel Strike Affects Boricuas
Sierra Believes 1,500 Have Been Unemployed. By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA EL MUNDO Staff Writer About 1,500 workers in the U.S. steel industry are affected by the steel and coal strikes prevailing in the country. This was revealed yesterday by Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra Berdecia, when questioned about the effects of the steel and coal strikes on Puerto Rican workers in the United States who, under contract supervised by the Department, went to work in U.S. factories. The Puerto Rican workers serving in the Nation's steel industry work for the National Tube Company, which operates a mill in Gary, Indiana, and the Carnegie Illinois Company, which operates another in Lorain, Ohio. Others are employed at other Chicago steel mills. Mr. Sierra Berdecia reported that the director of the office of the Insular Department of Labor in the city of Chicago, Mr. Harold M. Mann, kept him informed of the situation of the workers in Puerto Rico, due to the strike. Mr. Mann reported to Commissioner Sierra that Puerto Rican laborers working in factories in Gary, Indiana Harbor and Chicago have been visiting his office for orientation. The office has been making efforts to employ Puerto Rican workers who have been laid off in agricultural work. Others have been coming to Puerto Rico to visit their families while waiting for the strike to end. The office has made efforts to offer work for agricultural purposes to all workers who are unemployed due to the strike. This has been accomplished in many cases, other agencies having placed a number of them in field work. Mr. Mann suggested to Commissioner Sierra Berdecia. that emphasis be placed on the workers who have come to the Island, and those who have temporary jobs on agricultural farms, on the importance of returning on time to their jobs in the steel mills, at the end of the hu-L garlo conflict. In this regard, he said that a delay in returning to work at the mills at the end of the strike could result in the loss of their previous jobs. Mr. Mann further revealed to Commissioner Sierra that Puerto Rican workers have been participating in picketing and other strike activities. "This attitude," he stated, "has tended to improve the attitude of the other steelworkers and the community toward them. Strike Benefits / Meanwhile, Mr. Mann reported, Puerto Rican workers have been receiving "strike benefits" paid by the United Steelworkers Union to its members when they are on strike. In addition, the Chicago office of the Department has been successful in getting companies to stop Puerto Rican workers on strike from being locked out of their homes. Steps were taken to prevent the National Tube Company and Carnegie Illinois from evicting workers from their employer-owned homes during the strike. The 1,500 Puerto Rican workers employed in the steel industry were hired in Puerto Rico by employment agencies, under the (continued on page 14, Col. 4)
Reorganization Commission Requests Elimination of 29 and Consolidation of 22 Other Separate Government Agencies
Dominicans Return Home Today The Emissaries * Wish to Strengthen Commercial Relations with the Island By BENJAMIN~SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer TONIGHT the members of Ja Misión Dominicana, who arrived Thursday in San Juan to reciprocate a courtesy visit that Vice Admiral Daniel E. Barbey made to the Dominican Republic last August, will return to their homeland after being the object of numerous receptions. The ceremonies held on Thursday afternoon, in the reception room of the frigate Presidente Trujillo, to present the Admiral with the Pablo Duarte and Christopher Columbus decorations, were solemn and impressive. The Dominican Mission has received, on behalf of the military authorities, all the attentions and courtesies indicated in the protocol rules, in relation to the ambassadors of good will coming from the friendly nations*. The emissaries from the sister nation, many of whom have blood ties with Puerto Ricans, said that their country could supply Puerto Rico with all the meats, vegetables, milk, eggs, rice, vegetables, coffee and other products that we might need. Vice Admiral Barbey, chief of the Tenth Naval and Maritime Frontier Department of the Caribbean, and General Edwin L. Sibert, chief of the Military Department of the Antilles, personally received the Dominican Mission upon its arrival on the morning of Juovei. The destroyer Generalissimo and the frigates Presidents Trujillo and Presidents Peynado dropped anchor alongside the Navy pier at the Isla Grande Naval Station, bringing 400 men of the armed forces on board. Ambassador Julio Ortega Frier presided over the Mission. At ten o'clock in the morning, Ambassador Ortega Frier reciprocated the visit of Admiral Barbey, in the Administration Building of the Tenth Naval District and at eleven o'clock that of General Sibert, in his office at Brooke. They also paid a courtesy call on the Governor. In the afternoon, at 5:00 o'clock, Admiral Barbey's decoration ceremonies were held aboard the frigate President Truel in the following order: reading of Jos decrees, by an officer do-minicai "í"| á'sí'urso of the Ambassador hnposlclón of the medals*; salvk of 21 cannon shots while the Band played the Dominican National Anthem; speech by Admiral Barbey; and salvk of 21 cannon shots while the Band played the National Anthem of the United States. Other Celebrations t After these ceremonies a reception was offered and attended by numerous civilian personalities, Bishop Jaime Pedro Davis, of the Diocese of San Juan; Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, president of the Simado; Mr. Benlclo Sánchez /Castaño, president of the Bar Association; Mr. Ernesto Juan Fonfrias, senator; Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa, of the House of Representatives: and others. (Continued on Ja p. 14, col. 5)
Loíza River Water Service Inaugurated Today System To Supply Canóvanas, Río Grande The Executive Director of the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority, Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, announced yesterday that the second section of the Rio Grande de Lolza aqueduct project pipeline will be put into service today, when the systems of the towns of Canóvanas and Rio Grande will be connected. Reportedly, Canóvanas currently has more water than it needs, while Rio Grande only has service for R hours a day, that is, two hours in the morning, two at noon and two in the afternoon. Mr. Cuevas added that Rio Grande will be provisionally supplied with water from Canóvanas. The line consists of 26,284 feet of 10-inch pipe. Its installation cost $130,000 and took two months*. Mr. Cuevas added that in addition to benefiting the town of Rio Grande, where the water problem was distressing, the entire rural area along the road that goes from Canóvanas to Rio Grande will benefit, where there are several Ja Autoridad de Tierras parcels, cow farms, many farmers and residences, Beneficia - Mameyeo So also informed that the new water service will also greatly benefit the town of Palmer, also known as Mameyes, where there has been a lack of water for a long time. Mr. Cuevas concluded by saying that later, when the section that connects Carolina and Canóvanas is completed, and the filtration plant that is being built as part of the Rio Grande de Lolz* project is put into operation, water will be supplied to both the Rio Grande* and Canóvanas from this new plant.
The new plant, which will supply water to both Rio Grand and Canovanas, arrived in Puerto Rico yesterday. Recently q. Captain Benitez distinguished himself, when the Chinese Co. submarine, under his command, sank in Norwegian waters, owing to a serle of explosions, the origin of which is as yet unknown. The expertise of the commander Benitez was such that not a single member of his crew perished. The transport dams, which brought Benitez and his wife and daughters, docked at the Navy pier at 11:30 in the morning. Hundreds of women and children were aboard the vessel, which sailed from Norfolk, Virginia, on the 17th of the present. As a special courtesy it was decided that the first person to go ashore was Captain Be. nftez, who was holding his daughter Maria Christina in his arms. He was followed by his wife Nancy, with their other daughter, Mar. garita Amelia. They were waiting for Padreo . Celestino Benitez, Municipal Judge of Ponce, and Marina Rovira de Benitez, assistant superintendent of schools in the same city, were waiting for him at the pier. Other relatives of the sailor were also there to welcome him. Rafael Celestino Benitez is a young man barely thirty-two years old. The hardship of his life on a submarine during the war years, and the bitter experience of the sinking of his ship in the midst of explosions in a stormy sea, have not soured his character or hardened his countenance. On stepping on Puerto Rican soil, deep emotion showed in his eyes and in the tone of his voice. It seems like a dream," he said, "after the bitter hours I recently lived through, finding myself inside a (Continued on pg. 14, co. 1)
Governor Approves General Municipal Roads Program
The general program of municipal roads was approved by the Governor. With the allocation of $2,400,000 made by the Legislature at its last regular session, 51 projects will be carried out in 44 towns. These are broken down into 46 municipal roads and 5 bridges. The details of the program are *1 as follows: Adjuntas, Vegas Arriba, 2.25 kms. $90,000; Aguad*, N*r*njo number 2, 150 kms. $60,000; Aguadilla. Calml. te! Low. 2.00 kms. $95,000; Arecibo. Santana Garrochales, 2.00 kms. $12,000; Arecibo, Garrochalee Factor, 1.00 km. $10,000; Arroyo, Laurel. 050, km. $10,000; Barceloneta, Garrochales, 0.50 km., 5,000; Barceloneta, Magueies, 1.50 km., 40,000;
Cabo Rojo, Guanajibo, 2.50 km, 70,000; Carolina. Canovanlllas - Carrazo, 1.70 km, 650,000; Carolina, Boca Cangrejos Bridge - 10,000; Carolina, Carrazo Bridge No. 58, - 15,000; Cayey, Vegas No. 2, 2.50 km, 78,000; Ceiba, Chupacallos, 1.50 km, 58,000; Cíales, Pozas, 2.00 km, 80,000; Corozal, Palmarlto No. 2. 1.50 km, 64,000; Fajardo, Chupacallos, 2.50 km, 80,000, 64,000; Fajardo, Cabezas, 2.40 km, 78,000; Guayama, Las Mareas, 1.80 km, 40,000; Guayanilla, Pasto (Sierra Baja), 0.60 km, 6,000; Guaynabo, Acueducto, 1.00 km, 40,000; Guaynabo, Acueducto, 1.00 km, 40,000; Hatillo, Atacama, 1.00 km, 40,000, 40,000; Hatillo, Aibonlto, 0.50 Km., 15,000; Hatillo, Bayaney (Rt. No. 33), 1.00 Km., 30,000; Humacao, Tejas, 0.90 Km., 70." 000; Isabela, Coto Llanadas, 2.20 Kms., 60,000; Juana Díaz, Puent* (Continued on 1* p. 14, col. 6).
Returned to the Island by Commander Rafael C. Renite'z
W ■ 1 "uHML w ■Mr ■ 1 > < W IKt ? #-- W' w O i" ■ Jl * fl -flB ■ E MMmIÍB i I B - fe? 9 Á I ■ & S A ■ ■ ■ MBS M HB M HB Mi a H w M \ wnf jNMNNNMMMMMMMMRRMMMMMHBk.
Shortly after his arrival aboard the transport President Adams, Capt. Rafael C. Benitez poses with his family at the Navy pier. From left to right: his father, Licenciado Celestino Benitez; his wife Nancy Critehlaw de Benitez, with his daughter Margarite Amelia Benitez, with his other daughter, Maria Cristina; and his mother, Doña Maria Revira de Benitez, (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Commander of the Pig Submarine that sank off Norway Boricua Describes the Last Moments of the Ship. - He had been absent from Puerto Rico for 8 years.
\ For JUAN MRTINEZ CHPEL > Editor of EL MUNDO Rafael Celestino Benitez, frigate captain of Ja Marina or" Jetudo".
U.S. Red Leaders Sentenced To Five Years And $10,000 Fine, - Thompson Minor Penalty For JACK V. FOX NEW YORK, Oct. 21, 21, 2001. FOX NEW YORK, Oct. 21 - (PU) - Judge Harold R. Medina today sent eleven American Communists to prison and denied them bail. All but one of those convicted of conspiring to advocate an American revolution were sentenced to five years in a federal penitentiary and fined $10,000. The heroic wartime record of one defendant, Robert Thompson, 34, chairman of the New York State Party, won him a reduced sentence. He was sentenced to three years in prison and a $10,000 fine. (Continued on p. 14, col. 6) 25,235 Workers Receive Prospective Unemployment Insurance Increase At the conclusion of the first week of unemployment compensation payments to workers in the sugar industry on Friday, a total of $81,809 was distributed to 25,235 workers, according to Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra Berdecia. The payment of employment insurance began last Monday throughout the Island. As of yesterday, 22,183 agricultural workers have received the total amount of $66,549; while 3,052 factory workers have received $15,260. Mr. Sierra Berdecia indicated that the perspective is that the amount to be paid will increase, as well as the number of workers who will benefit from the insurance. He further explained that in those cases in which a worker qualified to receive the compensation does not receive it for some reason or another on the day of payment in his town, he will receive it on the subsequent payment date. First Complaint On the other hand, Armando Rlvero, secretary general of the Sugar Union reported yesterday (Continued on page 14, col. 5)
The Government Reorganization Office, in its Report to Governor Muñoz Marín, delivered yesterday, recommends the reduction of public agencies to 23; the elimination of 29 separate organizations and the transfer of 22 others to existing parliaments and agencies. In addition, it calls for the abolition of 6 other boards of directors and two executive boards. The Commission also asks the Governor to "create a permanent administrative management unit". It also recommends greater administrative powers for the Governor, such as assuming all the functions of the Executive Council, except the delimitation of electoral districts, but formulates a plan for the later elimination of the Executive Council. It advocates, in addition, a complete reorganization of the Governor's Office and major reorganizations in almost every agenda and department of the Government. - Official Statement Yesterday, La Fortaleza issued the following official statement regarding the report rendered by the Reorganization Commission: The Commission in charge of studying the reorganization of the Executive Branch of the Government finished its work. A few days ago the members of said Commission delivered to the Governor of Puerto Rico the Report containing their recommendations. The Governor is carefully studying the 202-page Report. The* recommendations of the Commission will assist the Governor in formulating both the measures which he may implement in the administration and the concrete proposals which he will submit to the consideration of the legislative chambers for the purpose of achieving a greater degree of efficiency in the operation of the Executive Branch. The translation of the report submitted to the Governor is being worked on and will be made known to the Jubilee in due course. A summary of the report, which includes the recommendations made by the Commission, is being prepared, although it does not discuss them.
The Reorganization Commission has been examining the Executive Branch of the Government for four months. It has found that it is in a transitional stage, in which it performs certain tasks of very advanced organizations, while other tasks are performed in a manner that is not always the most useful, for example, the effort in planning, budget administration, personnel, accounting and auditing is greater than in many states of the Union, while other activities are hampered by divided responsibility and authority, and a grouping of functions that is not always the most useful. Among the latter, it is necessary to untangle the skein of fifty years of administration d* governors by appointment, as we wish to reap the pie- - no benefit of an elee" i to democratic leadership. The Governor must have adequate authority to act quickly and in a coordinated manner in dealing with the problems of the lila. He must be able to rely on officials who are accountable to him for the fulfillment of clearly fixed and defined responsibilities for which the Governor is, in turn, accountable to the Legislature and "1 puebla. The multiple operating functions of the Executive Branch must be regrouped in order to increase its efficiency and reduce the number of separate agencies. The structure of some organizations must be changed so that they can more easily perform the task entrusted to them. Arrangements must be made to continually maintain the best possible erg*nlzaclon and the most effective procedure which will ensure the greatest efficiency and economy. When this has been achieved, huerta Rico will begin to reap the full benefits of executive direction of public affairs, properly accounted for in the hands of a Chief Executive elected by the people and in whom they have placed their confidence. The Commission presents its recommendations as possible means to that end. These recommendations, briefly summarized below, would increase the degree of responsibility and authority of the Governor by transferring to him, on the one hand, executive powers and, on the other, by relieving him of many minor duties which he is now compelled to attend to; they would also increase his administrative control of the Executive Branch, (Cont. on p. 1).
Ortega Decorates Admiral Barbey
W i ' í tin S i ii'ímMfmWW 1 ' -I' 3 1 1 : -wáH The Ambassador Plenipotentiary of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Julio Ortega, imposed on Admiral Daniel Barbey, the Juan Pablo Duarte Ribbon, the highest decoration awarded by the Dominican government. The ceremony took place the day before yesterday in San Juan, on board the frigate Presidente Trujillo (Photo EL MUNDO).