THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY! Partly cloudy with occasional showers, mostly at night, IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, 18 degrees: low, 4" degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., M.M inches of mercury.
(FV) - In the afternoon today ao infernaren the following temperatures: New York, l$l Chicafe, Ol Washington, Mt. Miami; W. PredlMionea for maflana in New York and neighboring doubts: clear" and cold meneo, with the highest temperature near 48.
DIARIO Di LA MARAÑA
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY 'ABC
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Poet Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1949
NUMBER 13891
FIVE CENTS
* Pons Accelerates Hospital For Ponce
Will Make Innovation In Asylum Facilities Work At A Rate *5,900,000 Allocated* For 1950 By Lulo Harnándes Aqulno } El Mundo Editor The Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Poní, in New York, reported that he has been conferring with the architect who prepared the plans for the Ponce District Hospital, with a view to including new designs in them. The work will be completed at a cost of $3,500,000 this year, along with eight other constructions to be carried out in different parts of the Island, and will be followed by the Psychiatric Hospital. Dr. Pons also informed that the BCG vaccination campaign has been completed in several towns and that the vaccination of school children will be completed during the rest of the fiscal year, of which a total of 3,000 have already been vaccinated. Dr. Pona returned to the island on Thursday night. He said that the purpose of his hasty visit to New York was to meet with the architect of the Ponce District Hospital, Mr. Isadora Rosenfield, who informed him of the advisability of including new ideas in the miamos. It was about improvements in the operating room and in the dispensing of the work. Dr. Pons considered it appropriate to see the improvements that would have been introduced in the United States in operation. In this sense, he visited the Wellfaro Island dispensary, as well as the Kings County Hospital in New York. Dr. Pone had the opportunity to see these facilities at work, accompanied by Mr. Rosenfield. His decision as to the changes to be made will be conveyed to the latter. Dr. Pons expressed that the project of the Roneo District Hospital should be approved by the end of June next by the Federal Government, and that once approved, the construction of the works will begin in advance. Regarding the BCG vaccination program, the Commissioner of Health stated that it will be continued during the fiscal year. The vaccination of school-age children, of whom about 3,000 have already been vaccinated, will be completed. In the towns of Bonre, Mayagüez, Caguas and San Jutn, vaccination has already been completed in public schools, and vaccination will begin in those private schools that accept the misfit. Vaccination was also completed in the towns of Aguas Ruanas and Manatí. Next fiscal year, the vaccination of the prc.scnhroe children will be done, totaling 300,000, and the vaccination of the recionnaeids will be done from the third year of vaccination onwards. Work to be carried out" | On the other hand, when questioned yesterday by the Director of the Hospital Census Office, Mr. Julio A. Perez, as to what work would be started next year, he stated that there is, (Continued on page 1$ Col. 4", "Veterans Pay will be in the next year. Veterans Payout To Be January 16 Covers Insurance "Dividend" For 16,000,000 Men WA1HTNGT0N, Dec. 3ñ, - (FU)- votorans' dividend shocks will begin to be sent to 18,000,000 World War II veterans on January 18, the Veterans Administration announced today. This is the largest disbursement operation of its kind ever rained on the Alabama. Checks will be mailed at a rate of 1,000,000 per week until the program is completed, probably in May. The VA is distributing more than 13,800,000,000,000 on surplus accumulated during and since the war through premium overpayments. The individual dividends, ranging from a few hundred dollars to a maximum of $250, will be based on three factors: the size of the veteran's national service insurance policy; how long it has been in force; and how old the veteran was when he or she took it out. Order of Mailing . The order in which the jackets will be shipped is determined by a complicated formula based on the soldier's serious number of service- MS ¡ * The 1* VA's "fuROianarió" suspect that thousands of veterans have already "spent" the dividends. The merchants of the coata a costa announced during the sales prenavlda(Continued on page 18 Col. 4)
Third Indictment in Fire Case] ( j ' B Bis A S | IB" ■ WBkSMBAI 1 , ■ a L' ' v JMHWÉb- s jfM Prosecutor Angel Viera Martínez (left) interrogates Mr. Lucas Castro (right) at the Island Police Headquarters, shortly after his arrest. Mr. Castro was listed as the owner of the Almacene, Palón and had an endorsement on the warehouse policy. In the center, Detective Miguel A. Torrea (Photograph by EL MUNDO) í<
Mission Of 2 Spanish Poets E. Panero And L. Rosales Will Offer A Recital On January 3rd Yesterday arrived to the Island the Spanish poets Leopoldo Panero and Lula Rosales, who will give a recital in the Cesa de España on January 3rd, at eight o'clock in the evening. The Panero and Rosales Lñaras visited KL MUNDO's editorial office accompanied by the Consul General of Spain in Puerto Rico, Mr. Pablo Ubarri, Marques d# San Femando. The cultural tour of the Spanish intellectuals is sponsored by the Dirección General de Relacioné! Cultural dd Ministry of Foreign Affairs and by the Institute of Hispanic Culture, directed by Mr. Sanchez Bella. They expressed their desires Intellectuals visitors, gives to know the Puerto Rican poets to give them to know in Spain, where the poetic mnvlmlento is maintained in all its vigor and splendor. > They also indicated that it is necessary to establish more intimate cultural relations between the Puerto Rican poets and writers and those of the Peninsula, who at this time are unaware of the literary mnvimlenlos of Mientra tanfn Panero and Rosales will remain at the Palace Hotel, where they hope to receive some publications from the poets, and Puerto Rican writers, before leaving for South America, next January 4. The distinguished poets have prepared a poetic collection, which under the name of La Encina y e! Sea has already published some volumes, among which are the following: Antología Tierra, by nneta dnmlnlrann Manuel del Cabral; Escrito a Cada Instante, pnr Leopoldo Panero, La Casa Escondída, by Luis Rosales and La Espora, - by José Marla Valverde, They have also published and plan to continue publishing antoln- ' Ría, hispanoamericanos, halo los । aiisplrins del Institu o de Cultura HIspAnka, and, the poetic anthologies of Nicaragua and (Cent, la página 10, Col. 4) have been published.
Lucas Castro Arrested Yesterday For Alien Street Sinister
He is charged with <1p Ion Miñnioñ Delito* Que *e Imputed To Palón and Batalla. Bail Set at $280,000
-- By ENRIQUE RAMIREZ BRAU , n.. Editor of EL MUNDO Mr. Lucas Castro, RR, a native of Juncos, was charged yesterday by Ran Juan Prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez with eight and two counts of assault and battery.
Airman Rios Sued By Eastern Airline Demands $500,000 From Bolivian For Loss Of Plane WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 (FU)- Eastern Airline today sued Bolivian pilot Erlck Rios Brldoux for the sum of 'SMY),000 for "recklessly" crashing into an Eastern Air Lines DC-4 transport plane, causing the plane to crash on Nov. 1, with the loss of 55 lives. In a lawsuit filed in federal court here, the company rejected all responsibility for the tragedy - the worst in the history of commercial aviation - and has asked for payment of damages for the loss of the plane only. A trial of the suit would probably fix its liability for the disaster, IF Eastern is exonerated of wrongdoing, it would not be subject to suit for the sohrevlvi'nteg of the victims. The v aslern has asked for a jury trial. The F-3R fighter jet, a war surplus that was testing the plinth for its government, rammed into the DC-4 while both were on their way to Washington National Airport to land, T.e Charged Negligence w ". T.a Eastern accused Rios of operating his plane "carelessly, recklessly and negligently" to cause the accident. All 51 passengers and four crew members aboard the plane were killed. Rln, was thrown into the Potomac, but escaped with back injuries and lacerations. 1 At a press conference recently, after being released from the hospital, the Bolivian denied responsibility for the crash,
He was the main cause of the fire in the building at 300 Fortaleza Street, which in the early morning of December 15, caused the death of two people, two more being saved, one by shaking through a window and another who was helped from a gunshot wound. Ayar at 2:30 P. M., District Attorney Viera Martinez ordered the arrest of Lucas Castro, resident of Lutz Street in the Villa Palmeras neighborhood. A few moments after the arrest order, Lucas Castro, who was accompanied by several officers, entered the headquarters. The fisea! Viera Martinez tnmó statements to Castro in the room d" laboratory of the Negociado d" Fingerprints, after In which the prosecutor Infoimó to EL MUNDO that speaks accused .Lucas Castro, of the same crimes for Jos for which । speaks accused Miguel A. Palou and MIrupI A. Batalla or Cirilo Batalla, ron whose name is also s c I" known. The prosecutor added that he had set Castro's bail bonds at $30,000 per count of murder and $520,000 per count of one of the two attempts on his life. The total bail amount set for Lúeas Castro is 52RO.OOO, "I have evidence," he said. , .. "I have testimonies of people and documentation to support the accusation against Lucas Castro", said prosecutor Viera and added: "Before yesterday, I already had enough evidence to have ordered his arrest". All the facts that occurred at 300 Fortaleza Street are imputable to Lucas Castro, Batalla and Palou. Lucas Castro was testifying extensively to prosecutor Vlwa Martinez, who refused to reveal the nature of the defendant's testimony. -(Continued on page 33, Col. 1)
Drug Discovered to Calm Effect of Alcohol on Nerves
I i By Paul F. Filia I NEW YORK, Dec. 30. (P,. i U.)- With only 24 hours " left before the New Year, some 8,000 scientists learned today that a drug developed by the British is good for relieving the nervousness caused by alcohol. The drug, known as Miaña- . sin, has already been used in the treatment of some cases of cerebral palsy and also to loosen muscles in victims of pn' lio. (This year according to a group । of researchers at Hahnemann Hospital, Philadelphia. The drug has been of value in the reduction of fear and anxiety in alcoholic sufferers at a clinic in Illinois. The only difficulty with their report was the fact that the drug cannot be obtained over the counter at the corner drug store, but requires a prescription from a physician. ) They used Ranas - Loa scientists 4e Flledelfia. don. - torea B. Beutner and T. O. Barnea, told the American Association > for the Advancement of Science, that
-lina hahlgn Injected 1a drug into frogs to determine what happens to " an animal during the effect. The frogs were subjected to all sorts of tests, including expensive devices to record brain waves, such as the electroencephalograph. The breathing and "spontaneous movements" of the frogs were measured before and after the injection of the drug. Human aerea are not frogs, but science has found that the animals used in the experiments give you ideas as to how to treat man. In the case of the Mianealn Injections, the frog's muscle, heart and brain nerves eorrlentea decreased rapidly within a minute of time. In addition, they found that the rezpl? ■ ration decreased from PO to 18 per minute, and the pulse rate from 80 to 70 per minute. s were calmed ... In general, the frog subjected to the i experiment was calmed*- a i condition presumed to occur an i (Cont an on page 10. Cok S).
Passes to Munoz Bill Signing Tribute Fixing To All Coffee Piled
Tries To Impede Strike The Lune*. Se In For Lula í <F Redactor di The í'ervlcio of Conciliation of the not yesterday in the controveram worker-p of the Irduatr 4 * of! telephone and the 1 which threatens to degenerate into a est According to informed yesterday the Director, of the Service of Conciliation, Mr. Adolfo Collazo, loa leaders of the Union Indicated to him that they have sent him a letter notifying him about the Impasse in the negotiations. Conciliator Collazo expects to receive the letter later today. But in the meantime, the conciliator was in contact with the Union leaders yesterday, obtaining information about the dispute. As soon as he receives official notification from the Union, the Adjudicator intends to intervene directly in the dispute with a view to averting the work stoppage threatened by the company's employees. He declined to inform Mr. Collazo whether he intended to summon the parties to resume negotiations, but disclosed that he had been invited to attend the Union's meeting, which will take place on the following day (Continued on page 18 Col. 8).
New Furnace of Ponce Cement. Corp. Hr ... ■f I i I I L 1 ■ u i b 1 . H Ik I ■ > í It '\nI 1 P * 91'- ■■■ Moment, in which the vleeprealden!* of the Fonea Cement Corporation, Mr. Luí" A. Ferré (on the left eon capacete), connects the switchboard that starts up the plant's fourth kiln, which was installed at a cost of one million dollars. Next to him is the senior Jo-é Ferró, also a member of the Ferró company. (Photo EL MUNDO). -* ■ ,
Woman Accused of Using Mail Against the Law Mary Soto Agreed to Have Sent Obscene Tarts* Addressed to Herself । Mary Soto de Fernandez, a 19-year-old woman, married to Agenol Fernandez, was arrested by the Inspector General of the Post Office, Mr. Harry Stolberg, accused of having deposited obscene letters* in the mail. Inspector Stolberg reported yesterday that some time ago the defendant's husband, Fernandez, came to his office to show him three obscene letters he had received from his wife. The missives were signed some by a certain, Gülche, and others with the initials LGL. The federal officer initiated an investigation of the case, moving to Lares, where the accused and her husband reside. He went to the local post office in Lares, where the letters were deposited and received. Mr. Stolberg found out that Luis Gerena Lopez, alias GUIch, 24 years old, had been the boyfriend of Mrs. Fernandez. The latter some time ago accused Gerena in the District Court of Aguadilla of having attacked her in order to commit an outrage. i The case was tried in said court, and Gerona Lopez was convicted and sentenced to serve from one to two and a half years in prison. i (Cont "n page 12, Col. 8>
Conciliation Service Media Dispute Laborers and Telefónica
Degenere en Prometida ivocaría Ley Taft-Hartley Mánchen Cappa le EL MUNDO 1 Department of Labor Intendpatronal "urged among employees Puerto Rico Telephone Company, the itado huelgarlo.
No Review Of Current Milk Prices Will Be Made. Vicéns Ríos Declares Condition in New York Not Reflected on the Island The price of milk in Puerto Rico will remain unchanged for the time being although it may be subject to revision, according to Mr. Antonio Vlcén* Rio*, general manager of Sumlnt*tros, told EL MUNDO yesterday. EL MUNDO yesterday announced a one-cent reduction in the price of a quart of milk, authorized by two major distributors of the food in the New York area. Questioned Mr. Vlcéns Ríos "on *1 the reduction in the price of milk in New York is said to be reflected in the price of local milk, he said that the peculiar conditions of production in Puerto Rico "are different from those in New York, and therefore he does not speak about it. Col. 7)
For WILLIAM nORVTLLTER Correeponaal of EL MUNDO in Wáshlngton WASHINGTON, December 30. for EL MUNDO) - Puerto Rican veterans* will receive approximately $11,550,000 in "veteran's evurn" dividends* next year since all veterans have ■National Service Life Insurance, it was estimated today, The Veterans Administration does not have a detailed list of states, counties or cities, a spokesman told EL MUNDO:jo to EL MUNDO a spokesman for 1a VA, but oxplieó that a computation can be made based on loa 66,000 Puerto Rican* veterano* of World War II. The VA clarified that the count is not current. The total amount distributed *-* is expected to be $2,800,000,000,000 nationwide. Based on this, the figure for Puerto Rico was obtained by multiplying the number of voters, 66,000, by the average of 1 - * * * *.
- 4 S" D "icubr" Uranium "n State of Michigan PITTSBURGH, Penellvania, dlclemhro 80. - (PU) - The Jones A JAUghlin Steel Corporation announced today the discovery of uranium deposits in northern Michigan, and stated that exploration will be carried out to determine if the discovery has any economic significance. A spokesman for I* corporation said that a geologist employed by the Jones A Mtighi Iln Ore Company, a daily aubsl- , landmarked the discovery last August. Faca that time only the material was known to be radioactive. However, the material was later identified by scientists at the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission as uranium oxide in the form of pitchblende. The carrier did not peacefully locate the land where the uranium was found. "The discovery was made as a result of a systematic search for uranium mining in an area that appeared to hold geological promise for such a discovery," he said. Key Sugar Quota Judged; DeProsperity Analyzes Island's Economic Prospects During 1950 By WlLIAM~DÓRVnXntR WASHINGTON, Dec. M (Special to THE WORLD)-Economic experts say business will be good in the United States in "l 1950. IF they are good on the mainland, then they must be good in Puerto Rico. That is the general impression, and history, to some extent, confirms that assumption. There are, however, some known and some more unknown factors that may affect the trade situation in Ja lela, and it is not necessarily true that Puerto Rico's economy is keeping pace with that of the mainland. For example, the Island depends largely on the amount of sugar it can sell; a reduction in the crop, due to a small sugar quota, can make a tremendous difference in the outlook for the year. Most observers here would calculate the Island's commercial prospects in direct relation to the amount of sugar that can be sold to growers in 1950. Prospect of Success During the past year there has been a great deal of activity in the direction of a better sugar quota deal for the island. Next year, it would seem, will see efforts multiplied and there is the prospect that some success will be achieved. At least there are now more influential people in Washington aware of the importance of re-examining the treatment Puerto Rico has been receiving in the establishment of sugar quotas. IF the House Agriculture Committee can find the time to visit the U.S. sugar quota.
Boricua Veterans to Receive $11,550,000 in Dividends
The spokesman explained that it would be difficult to calculate the exact amount for veterans in Puerto Rico without knowing how many veterans on the island are insured to serve. The $11,550,000 figure is assuming that all veterans have service insurance. The veterans' administrator, 1 Carl B. Grsy," enunciated today that the first 1 divldendoe checks for 1 service life insurance will be in- * vailed by mail from Wishing- * ton, on di* 16 rie January. He said that * some 300,000 checks will be mailed daily and that" all will have r been mailed by June 30 i. 4 About 14,500,000 veterans* ó" the ' World War II have ho- 1 I chu yajw* aolicitude* for lo* di- f videndo*. Otrc LTOOOOO ho in has J done yet and will not be able to receive c loa checks until quo I send theirs. ! The maximum shock a veteran can receive in ol payment ea- j, 1 pedal of dividends is $628. (
4 - Estimate Hike Would Be 11 Cents A Group of Delegates Voted Against the Measure. AGS Would Set Price 63c. By M. NIEVES RIVERA EL MUNDO Rodador At 9:05 A. M. yesterday went to press. M. yesterday passed for signature by the Governor the substitute bill for P. d" C. No. 3 which would impose a tax on all HWa of coffee that is harvested, harvested or introduced into Puerto Rico. The bill, which was before the Legislative Chambers during the twelve-day session of the Second Extraordinary Legislature of the Seventeenth Legislative Assembly, was approved by the House of Representatives after a lengthy caucus of the Treasury and Agriculture Committees of both bodies. At 3:30 A. M. yesterday, the House gave it * its approval with 28 votes in favor, 2 against and 9 abstentions. 2 "n against and 9 abstaining, for a total of 33 representatives present. Voting against the measure were Representatives Alvaro Rivera Raye* and Fren, risco Diaz Marchand. Representatives Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa Carreras, Carmelo Avila Medina and Fernando Juliá Calder abstained. Representative Diaz, who was in one of the offices of the House, suffered a congestion that kept him in bed for some hours, being helped by Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa Carreras, who had to apply the regetlvns to return him to normality. Dr. Figueroa, at the time of the vote, invoked Representative Días Marehariva to vote in absentia, due to the absence of another colleague; raising the question that there were already precedents in the House on this particular matter. He referred eapedflcameoto the catof Mrs. Amalla Marín Viuda rie Muñoz Rivera and stated that Representative Diaz Marchand had expressed her desire to vote against the measure. The House agreed to record Diaz Marchand's vote in the negative. Upon learning the result of the vote in principle, Carlos M. Rabassa, who had abstained, announced *1 his desire to join his vote to those cast* in the affirmative. Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa who "- abstained, and Messrs. Juan Malández, Leoncio SanHelia León, Joaquín To "e NoritiC and Pedro Vega Berrios Calenes voo" taron in the affirmative), announced' the Intention rie -Mirar m votes. In addition rf. loe so addressed the House explaining their" votes lo" Señorea Benjamin Or. tlz. Alfonso Román Garda and Franclsro Sánchez. They congratulated their colleagues in the House "for the spirit of" civility shown on -1 riMmpeño of their" labor lefialatlvas" eg in relation to 1 the project on coffee, Ja Miss Marta Llhertad Gomez and loa "añores Santla. -go Polanco Ahréu and Luis 9snt.Hi Capestany, Palabra" do Ramoa Antonia! El Presidente" de la Cámara do Representantes, licenciado Ernesto (Continued on Ja página 18, Col 1) "* 1 !■>,■■■ [ , Los Linchamientos Fueron Más en '49 r . * NEW YORK, Dec. 90. (P. ' U,)-The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People reported today that lynching and violence against Negroes rose sharply in 1949, but at the same time noted "satisfactory progress" toward broader rights for Negroes at the state and local levels. In its report "arapK the Asoeiadón Indicates that 1" federal civil rights legislation was "untested, but commends the progress that" has been made regarding ■ this in state legislation, in "i political development, in the decís!©- * * nes of the courts, and in ol recognition d" merit* pcnonalea. Four additional states adopted legislation on reasonable employment practices during the year, and progress was made toward desegregation in schools and in home and transportation facilities. "Pnr on the other hand," the Report adds, ol number d. reported lynchings increased from two in "1 Ifa 48 to four in 1949, and instances of violence by metln "s occurred "p - taiy-diit "nte localities such as ChL rago u San Lul< Washington, BlrmtnOVn PMkakHL New York, and GroKiri. Florida. expresses its discon. fool with 1" approval riel Secretary d" Ja Defense, Louis Johnson, tt the Army plans to Iguolat black" te" opportunities in (Continued "n page 33. Coi,
Recommends Giving Eastern New Route
Would Serve San Juan-N. York Reports Against Island Government Plan On Cheap Flight* For FAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 - (PU) - Dismissing as "impractical" the request of Puerto Rico for the establishment of a special low-cost air service, an Aeronautics Board examiner today recommended that transportation between the island and the U.S. mainland be improved by granting Eastern Airlines a route between San Juan and New York and Riddle Aviation Compuny a certificate for marquee service only for five years. In a sense, these recommendations fall short of the claims of the island government and other airlines involved in the case. The Island Government placed great emphasis on the need for a special type of cheap air transportation. But the initial reaction to the proposal from Insular sources was that the recommendations, if approved by the Board, would constitute a major step forward in meeting Puerto Rico's need for improved air facilities. However, before the Examiner's recommendations are argued before the Board itself, the parties in the case may file objections which will become part of the record. Such exceptions must be filed with the Board within 15 days, and 20 days thereafter additional pleadings will be allowed. L "g Recomendarlonee F.I report da Maddtn made the* *lgui "ntea recomendeeionM: 1. - That a certlcate of# public conveniencig and n "ce "ldad eu(Cnntlnút on page 18, Col. 5) - _i_i_i_zujIi.il ---- i* - jii । ~ ~ ~ ~ Q-*r~- -* -pri)-