THE MONDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with some scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees: low, 71. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 41 degrees SW this afternoon, 29.91 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Feb. IB. (FU) - Today m recorded the following" temper atura": Chicago 28: Miami 79; New York 10; Wáshlngton N. At La Guardia airport: maximum altitude 2400 feet; visibility: 0 miles; forecast for next two hours: none forecast for tomorrow: temperature somewhat cool, and sunny.
MORNING JOURNAL.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 1949
NUMBER 13589
FIVE CENTS
Muñoz To Mediate In APA And Workers' Crisis
Parties To Be Convened Soon - / Labor Organizations Hold Meeting Today. Another Assembly Tomorrow By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO It was authoritatively reported yesterday that Governor MuAoz Marin is willing to personally intervene in the controversy between sugar industry producers and workers, with a view to finding a solution acceptable to both parties. Although nothing was reported at La Fortaleza on the matter, it was revealed to this writer that the Governor proposes, if necessary, to invite the representatives of the Sugar Producers Association and the Free Sugar Union to a meeting in an effort to reach an agreement on wages. As is known, relations between the APA and both labor organizations regarding the collective bargaining agreement they have been negotiating have become critical. Negotiations broke down on Wednesday when employers and workers were unable to reach an understanding on the workers' wage demands, as well as other clauses of the contract. The Governor has been kept informed, he said, of everything related to labor-management relations. As reported in this newspaper yesterday, Mr. MuAoz Marin held a conference with representative Pedro Vega Berrios, president of the Union, with whom he considered the situation prevailing in the negotiations. The existing impression is that the Executive's Jofo may decide to invite the parties for a meeting "from one moment to the next." Our informant said that w the Governor is willing to act as conciliator in the case." But both the offices of the APA and those of the Union and the Free Federation announced that no invitation had been received from the Governor. Meanwhile, today, Saturday, the meeting of the Joint Committee of the FLT and the Union will be held to study the status of the negotiations, and to make the pertinent agreements on the action that both organizations believe they should take. The meeting will be held beginning at ten o'clock in the morning, at the offices of the Department of Labor, and the leaders of the FLT and the Union will be present. Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, General Secretary of the FLT, who due to illness has been prevented from attending the negotiations, intends to attend today's meeting. On the other hand, the Council of Unions of the Union will hold tomorrow, Sunday, an assembly, in the premises of the Parks and Recreation Commission, beginning at ten o'clock in the morning. At this meeting, the Union workers will be informed in detail of the situation of the negotiations, and it is likely that the Union leadership will be authorized to take the decision it deems convenient, in accordance with the development of the negotiations. Strike Mentioned
Union leaders said that "if the APA maintains its current position, a strike is inevitable," adding that "we need a day labor offer from the APA, and we have been asking for it. The leaders further stated that in terms of demand and supply "we are the workers in Rio Piedras" and the employers in San Juan. If the employers are willing to move forward, so are we, to meet at a reasonable point along the way. Although the conciliator, Adolfo Collazo, was in contact with the employers, making efforts to find a formula on wages and the clauses that caused the impasse, nothing concrete was achieved, according to what he reported. In view of the fact that the Minimum Wage Board has not yet omitted the decree fixing minimum wages and conditions for the sugar industry, it is considered possible that, in case of a strike movement, the Governor will issue a proclamation declaring a state of emergency, which would make it possible for the Board to omit the decree without loss of time in the procedures that remain to be followed for its promulgation. The decree will amend the original one promulgated by the Board, and is expected to establish increased minimum wages for both sides of the industry. The enactment of the decree could settle the controversy by setting minimum wages retroactive to January 1, 1949.
Mayors To Join U.S. Entity Plans To Send Commission 4 Convention To Be Held Washington The Mayors' Association of Puerto Rico, presided over by Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, will join the United States Mayors' Association. A delegation of municipal executives from the island is expected to attend the U.S. mayors' convention to be held in Washington from March 20 to 23. Funds will be requested from the Legislature for this purpose. The Mayor of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, stated at the recent school meeting in San Juan that the U.S. mayors' meeting will be held in Washington, D.C., from March 20 to 23. 6) Judge Condemns Unjustified Suspensions David Chavez Said He Will Not Allow Viciously Requested Postponements By Luis Sánches Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer Federal Short Court Judge David Chávez, Jr. has strongly condemned any attempt to viciously suspend cases pending in that court without just cause. Visibly annoyed, the magistrate rebuked attorney Juan Hernandez Valles, who asked the Court to suspend a case in which he represented Dimas Nieves Noives accused of violating the Selective Service law. The federal judge warned the lawyer that "he could not withdraw as defense counsel in his case without permission from the Court, and that if he did so, without just cause, the Court would take the corresponding action. The incident occurred during yesterday's session of the Court. Attorney Hernández Vallé, in requesting the suspension of the case against Nieves Nieves, alleged that the accused had met with him for the first time last Thursday, and that therefore he had not had enough time to prepare the case. He further stated that he was on his way to leave for the United States soon, and that he did not have enough time to attend to other cases and that of defendant Nieves Nieves. The Assistant U.S. Attorney, Pascual Amado Rivera, opposed the suspension, arguing among other things that the defendant had had sufficient time to procure him an attorney, citing the dates on which the indictment was filed and the date set to hear the case. The judge, showing surprise, asked the lawyer how he had decided to request the suspension of the case, when the accusation had been formulated long before the day of the trial. The judge implied that he was not willing to agree to extend the cases unjustifiably. The Judge said that "that will be done in (Continued on page 14 col. 6.)
Fernos To See Committee Chairs
Resident Commissioner Antonio Fernós Isern said yesterday that he had received an invitation from Ramiro L. Colón, general manager of Ir Cooperativa Cafeteros de Puerto Rico, to attend the annual assembly of the Cooperative, to be held on Sunday, March 13, in Pones. The Resident Commissioner was requested to explain the scope of his efforts regarding the rehabilitation of the coffee industry. Dr. Fernós stated that he had informed Mr. Colón that he was deeply grateful for the Invitation, but that it was not possible for him to accept it because he had to leave for Washington today, Saturday, in order to be there on Monday and hold a conference with the Chairman of the Education and Labor Committee of the House of Representatives, Mr. Lesinikt, in relation to the special provisions for Puerto Rico in the Hours and Salaries Act, which is under study by that committee". In his letter to Mr. Colón, Dr. Fernós briefly explains, however, the status of his efforts in Washington, as reported by EL MUNDO in yesterday's edition. That is, the case is under study by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which is trying to determine what part of the program can be carried out under the laws that govern it, and what part requires special legislation. The Resident Commissioner further stated that "from the conference he will hold on Monday regarding the Wage and Hour Law, his presence in Washington is necessary next week because the Administration's Social Security bill, which includes Puerto Rico in all its parts, without exceptions, has already been presented. If this bill is approved, direct federal funds will be established in Puerto Rico, in addition to those already allocated by the Insular Government and to the Old Age or Disability Insurance and Unemployment Insurance. Unemployment Insurance. The Resident Commissioner stated that he has been working on the extension to Puerto Rico of the Social Security Act, in all its aspects, and last year he filed a bill to that effect. This year, instead of submitting the bill separately, he had managed to have this provision included, together with the series of amendments to the Social Security Act in force in the United States, and that the Administration would try to modify it, extending it. > The Commissioner's efforts have been successful so far in his opinion, since the administration has endorsed his idea. The bill has been introduced by the Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Mr. Doughton. This is the appropriate committee to study the bill. The hearings will begin on Monday. The Administration representatives will decide first. State groups will decide on Wednesday and Thursday. The Commissioner expects to appear on those days, accompanied by officials of the Government of Puerto Rico, for which purpose he will have to meet with the Governor, Mr. Muñoz Marin, at one time or another.
Compendium of News
Censure of Auditor Cordero yesterday promoted a debate in the House. Mullos to mediate in the crisis between ATA and workers. Colón Torrea promotes mortgage loans for agriculture. Prosecutor says the Gomez case will be heard; but is surprised Attorney General says it was a murder. Island Mayors Association plans to affiliate with similar entity in the United States. They are using the Tifa machine throughout Patillas sound. Counterfeiting prosecutor pleads guilty. Fernós will discuss in Washington the bill on hours and wages. The Supreme Court ruled against an appeal by the Communications Union. Coffee growers ask the AGS to reconsider the price set for coffee. Government says cost of living went down in January.
Judge Chavez condemned Ir vicious petition for postponement of trials. The Senate Banking Committee reduced the original bill for the construction of homes. - 9176,000 appropriation to be requested to rehabilitate sick veterans do Ib Isla. Adaman as Runcho's personal triumph in the armistice between Israel and Egypt. An anthropological study will be conducted in Puerto Rico. Protest *that the Government ordered materials from foundries abroad. Vlcéns does not comment on House action. Kenneth Royall, * * * * Mark Clark and J. L. Devore, are expected in Puerto Rico, or * * * General Motors authorized a price reduction on its automobiles. * Clement Attlee was accused of favoring communism. A battle takes shape between Truman and Congress. e a - Spanish Republican Premier has plans to visit the Island.
Conference on Maneuvers
In conversation with Captain R. C. Armstrong, commander of the huge Roosevelt Roads Naval Base, appears Rear Admiral F. D. Kirtland, commander of the maneuvers carried out by the "enemy" forces and arbiter of the maneuvers held in Vieques. Rear Admiral Kirtland, Lieutenant General K. E. Hockey and Rear Admiral F. E. Hockey. E. Hockey and Rear Admiral Jerauld Wright arrived at Roosevelt Roads the day before yesterday morning aboard the Taconic, a Navy communications ship, to confer with Captain Armstrong to learn what part the growing Roosevelt Roads base is playing in the maneuvers. Activity at the base is being displaced and will intensify as the landings increase (Navy photo).
Prosecutor Says Gomez Case Cleared. But Postpones Decision
Prosecutor Believes Nu Had Enough Proof To Say It Was Murder. - Claims He Did Not Mention Such Solution in Interview
MAYAGUEZ. -(By E. Ramirez Brau). - At 3:30 in the afternoon, the prosecutor Felipe Marclutnd Gonzalez met with the representatives of the Prense, also present was the municipal judge Eugenio Sanchez Huia The prosecutor gave to the Press the following statements:
"I have been surprised by manlfes-" faetones published in the Press of the country today, as of the affirmation on the part of the Procurador Genera! in the sense that it is an ase sinato the case of Enrique Gómez Cintrón. This special circumstance that has arisen in the course of the investigation of this case, obliges me to clarify things that I wanted to bury with me until the day, opportune to inform my people what is true in this case. "The Attorney General does not have enough evidence to affirm or assure that Enrique Gomez was murdered. The prestigious pathologist, Dr. Enrique Kopplsch, in spite of his scientific efforts to clarify the facts in this case, has not been able to assure that the case of Enrique Gomez is a murder. It should be noted that in the interview that this Prosecutor held with the talented pathologist Dr. Kopplsch, and with fellow prosecutors Jose Aponte and Guillermo Gil, at no time did I comment that it was a murder. Moreover, I faithfully remember that I asked them all to forgive me for not revealing certain proof and evidence that lives with me and that the people will know one day. To my fellow Attorney General I instructed him to excuse me on his conscience and responsibility, from learning of evidence which I consider essential and which I have confiscated in the last days of this investigation. I assure you that I have "investigated all the previous witnesses who testified before fellow prosecutors Baldomcro Freyre and Fernandez Cabrera. I have caught new evidence, located and turned over additional witnesses. Everything is clearing the fog that covered this case. I advance to the citizens of order and peace of the country that at this stage of the investigation, I only dare to assure that the torso of the human being found in the rubble and ashes of the burned house corresponds to Enrique Gomez: and all this after having taken as evidence in this case the shoes that Enrique Gomez had on, at the precise moment of the development of such a horrifying drama of terror and sin. "I am satisfied that Dr. Kopplsch and this Prosecutor harmonized in certain scientific conclusions, such as that a fire could destroy a whole human body to the point of turning it into ashes, of- - (Cont. to Pg. 34. - Col. 7)
AGS Asked to Reconsider Coffee Price, Says Previous Decision Based on Incomplete Statistics The Coffee Sector of the Farmers Association filed a new petition with the office of the Administrator General of Supplies, requesting a reconsideration of the previous decision denying an increase in the price of coffee. The petition filed is the culmination of a conference held a few days ago between Senator Agustin Burgos, Representative Mario Canaloe, Mr. Martin Hernandez, economist at the Rio Piedras Experimental Station, and Mr. Antonio Vlcém Rios. "The petition of the coffee growers, signed by the President of the Seetor, Mr. Mario Canales, and by the Executive Director of the Farmers' Association, Mr. Virgilio Ramos, reads as follows: "We refer to your communication dated January 31 of this year, related to our request for reconsideration submitted by the Coffee Sector of our Association dated January 18 of this past year. We have given careful consideration to the reasons given by you in your above-mentioned communication, especially that part which relates to the cost of coffee pro. duedon, which you confess constitutes the basis for your refusal to grant our request. We have been pleased to see that you have discussed your arguments in your office papers, prepared by technicians of our Experimental Station, and we have not received them to ratify our opinion that the prices fixed by the General Administration of Supplies for coffee are neither fair nor reasonable for the coffee growers. Inconclusive Study We have consulted with the Dopar (Cont. on p. 14). - Col. 87
Spanish Republican Premier Plans to Visit Puerto Rico
NEW YORK, Feb. 25 (PU) - Alvaro de Albornoz, premier of the Spanish Republican Government in exile, plans to visit Puerto Rico next April, he said here yesterday. Mr. Albornoz stated that he plans to visit Mexico to attend to the affairs of his Government. Then he will probably visit Chile and other countries of the Americas. Upon his return to New York, in April, to attend the General Assembly sessions, he plans to visit Puerto Rico. The Republican Premier said that he has relatives residing on the island. "In addition," he said, "among Puerto Ricans, the Republic has many sympathizers with whom I want to make personal contact. (In San Juan, Mr. Manuel Albornoz y Carreras, a Banco Popular official, reported that he had no news of his uncle's planned trip. (Mr. Albornoz y Carreras, (Cont. on Page U- Col. 7)
ALVARO DE ALBORNOZ
Criticism of Auditor Caused Debate In Lower House
Airport Project Accelerated ■■■■ Re ■ to WALTER G. REICH Work Begins On Isla Verde Next June (Auction To Be Held On March 10th). Families Still Moving By Benjamín Santana Editor of EL MUNDO By the end of June the construction of the International Airport in Isla Verde will begin. This was revealed yesterday by Mr. Salvador T. Caro, general administrator of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, and engineer Walter G. Reich, of the Civil Aeronautics Board. Plans and specifications are ready for the first construction project, which will be auctioned on March 10. In the meantime, there are still 300 families residing on the site, which must be "located by the Government before the date indicated above. The total number of persons affected, however, is over 2,000, as the Government expropriated the remaining economic assets in that area after appropriating more than $1,000,000 for them. The original number of defendants, some 286, has now risen to 530, according to information provided yesterday by Mr. Carlos Faure, of the Land Division of the Department of Justice. First Project On March 10, the first project for the construction of the International Airport will be put up for public auction. Engineer Reich has been in charge of the preparation of the plans and specifications, together with the Engineering Division of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority. These have already been approved by the aforementioned governmental agency, and he now proposes to personally take them to the Regional Office of the Civil Aeronautics Administration in Atlanta, Georgia. It is expected that within 30 days this federal agency will give its final approval to the plans and specifications. The intervention of this agency is due to the fact that the U.S. Government is contributing five of the $15 million that the airport will cost. Approximately 500 people will be employed in this first project, in which about $1,600,000 will be invested. This first stage of the construction of the International Airport consists of clearing, grading and drainage. From March 10 to April 10 they will announce the auction in Puerto Rico and in the United States. From April 10 to April 30 they will study the proposals that are submitted, to award the auction to the highest bidder. The winning bidder will have 45 days to (Cont. on Page 14.- Col. 8)
Island's Spending On Food Purchased From U.S. Records Low
For Paul HARRISON WASHINGTON, Feb. 25 (PU) - Puerto Rico's postwar construction boom has apparently leveled off, the Puerto Rico Trade Council said today. . An analysis of island imports of building materials, the Council said, indicates that it peaked in purchases in the spring of 1948. At the same time the Council noted a slight downward trend in Puerto Rican expenditures on foodstuffs from the metropolis, which began to show up in the trade statistics last summer. The Council reported that Puerto Rico's exports to the
The Council reported that Puerto Rico's exports to the metropolis from January to November of last year amounted to $177,854,000 as compared with $185,441,000 in the same period of 1947, reflecting the decline in sugar prices. During the first eleven months of 1948, the Council said, the value of metropolitan products shipped to Puerto Rico was $296,196,000, compared with $278,952,000 in the same period of 1947. Thus, said the Council, the unfavorable trade balance of the island was the result of lower sugar prices and higher prices for metropolitan products, and continues to be more serious. (Continued on page 14 col. 6.)
Incident Arose When Asked for Data Motion Was Withdrawn After Discussion. Recesses Until Monday Strong statements of censure against the Auditor of Puerto Rico, the University and the Directors of Agencies and Authorities of the Insular Government, made by the Popular Representative, Mr. Manuel Acevedo Rosarlo, prompted a debate in the House yesterday, in which several members of the majority participated. The majority of the members of the House of Representatives, Mr. Manuel Acevedo Rosarlo, made a request to the Government agencies to submit a report on how they invest the public funds, and Mr. Acevedo Rosarlo stated that it was necessary for the Government agencies to submit a report on how they invest the public funds. "ario stated that it was necessary for there to be "an honest administration, to help the Governor". Speaking in a strong tone, Mr. Acevedo stated that it was necessary that the public money be well invested and denounced that while in the countryside there is no water for the poor, in the University the money is spent on luxuries. Before being interrupted by Reprehensive Santiago Polanco Abreu, Mr. Acevedo directed his attacks to the Auditor, censuring the procedure of the Island Audit Office of leaving out of Jos books the allocations authorized by the Legislature. Polanco Abreu attributed his colleague's attitude and words to "involuntary ignorance of the procedures followed in the administration of the different agencies," and declared that "the representative for Camuy had on his desk, contained in the Auditor's last report, the information he requested on the way in which public funds are invested. Polanco Abréu further stated that "the Auditor of Puerto Rico is a competent official, who performs his duties to the fullest. He added that the issue raised by Mr. Acevedo was out of order. Representative Acevedo stepped forward to answer Mr. Polanco Abréu, being again interrupted by Representative Augusto Valentín. After a brief exchange of impressions with Acevedo, Mr. Valentín announced to the House the termination of the incident. Another small incident was prompted by a motion of Rep. Guadalupe G. Pérez, of Ponce, regarding the problem of the probable closing of the Centra! Pellejas. In his motion, Mr. Pérez requested that the Land Authority and the Public Service Commission proceed to conduct an investigation and submit a report to the House, to determine if the purchase of the Pellejas plant was a good business for the people of Puerto Rico, or if it would represent an unfair burden on the taxpayers. When Mr. Mario Canales explained that the Pellejas issue was pending consideration before a commission already appointed, Mr. Pérez stated that there were many rumors circulating in Ponce and that he did not want the Central Caribe issue to happen again, nor did he want lobbying to work on the matter. Quickly, Mr. Canales asked the speaker to explain his words, and the questioner answered that: "I know that there are big lawyers interested in the business, which would be ruinous for the people of Puerto Rico". The motion of Rep. Pórez was approved, passing the matter to the Committee that studies the Pelleja problem". Benjamin Ortiz requested the following information from the Insular Homes Authority: 1 - Plans of the Insular Authority on Homes to solve the housing problem in the El Fanguito neighborhood, of Santurce, and other neighborhoods bordering the Caño Martin Pefla; 2 - Development of said plans up to the present; 3 - - If the plans entail the consent of the neighbors, rclacióp of those who have given said consent in writing and expression of the proportion, if any, of those who have denied; 4 - Economic perspectives for the future of the present plans, and date on which the physical work is to begin. The session of the House yesterday lasted from 10 o'clock until 11 o'clock in the morning, at which time a recess was declared until next Monday. The session was presided over by Representative Benjamin Ortiz. The Senate recessed briefly, at ten o'clock in the morning, prescribing until Monday at two o'clock in the afternoon. In the session, only several formalities were conducted, no action was taken on bills or resolutions.
Puerto Rico Included in Households Plan
Action Adopted by Banking Committee Federal Government Would Facilitate Aid for Global Program By Wn.IJAM DORVU.L1ER WASHINGTON, Feb. 25 (Special to THE WORLD)- The Senate Banking and Currency Committee, in approving the bipartisan homes bill that provides for the construction of low-cost rental housing, included many thousands of Puerto Rican families. The bill, as approved by the Committee and as it will be introduced in the Senate, is a compromise measure, substantially scaling back the program called for by the President. The original Administration bill called for a public housing construction program of 1,050,000 housing units for a period of eight years. The bill approved by the Committee will provide 810,000 units of public housing underwritten by the Government for the next six years. Puerto Rico enjoys parity with the states in the new project, as it did in the original draft of the Provisions; As approved by the Committee, the project provides for: 3. the construction of 810,000 units of undersubsidized housing by the Government over the next six years, 2. a $1,500,000,000,000 slum elimination program in the form of loans and grants to Puerto Rican states and municipalities, 3. a rural housing program of $1,500,000,000,000 in the form of loans and grants to Puerto Rican states and municipalities. 3. A $262,500,000,000 rural household program. 4. An extensive program of government aid to household surveys, and a national household survey in 1950. The Committee vote was 9 to 3, with two Republicans and one Democrat voting in the negative. The prospects for Senate passage are considered good in view of the bipartisan support for a public homes program. The House is also believed to favor the program. The Investment Requiring a maximum investment of three hundred eight million dollars over the next forty years, the new measure represents the most ambitious public housing program in the nation's history. Public housing under the project, if adopted by Congress in the form approved by the Committee, will be financed entirely by the Federal Government. The construction of 135,000 housing units annually is authorized by the project. The President, however, may, with the consent of his Council of Economic Advisers, increase the limit to 150,000 in any year or reduce it to 50,000. No matter what the annual changes, the total must amount to 810,000 in six years. Rural Bogars . In the rural household section, the bill makes farm buildings eligible for loans, as well as homes . . Assistance for under-producing farms was limited to $1,000 for temporary repairs. Farmers who fall behind in their payments due to crop failures or other reasons will have a temporary moratorium. An amendment would allow commercial banks to insure public bonds on homes. In the old bill such insurance was too limited for banks to take the risk of making investments. All slum clearance and low-income housing projects must be initiated by a housing authority in Puerto Rico. The Federal Government will subsidize, through cash contributions, each housing project that obtains the approval of the Administrator of the Federal Housing Authority. Under the project, the Federal Government will pay interest on the bonds to the Island Authority plus one-half of one percent that would be applied to the principal amount that is estimated to amortize the project debt over a period of forty years. The Island Authority will be responsible for the maintenance, management and operation of each project, of the (Continued on page 14, col. 6.)