THE NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temperature, 83 degrees; low, 88. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:10 p.m., 38.90 in. meecurts, No rain recorded.
NEW YORK, Hand 11. - (PU) - Temperatures today: Chicago, 39; Miami, 75; New York, 38; Washington, 43. At the airport Ij: Guard: high, 2,800 feet," with clouds; visibility, eight miles; wind, from the west northwest, twenty miles an hour, with strong gusts up to forty miles an hour. Tomorrow: Highest temperature, between forty and fifty; moderate winds.
MARANA NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, Poet Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 12, 1949
NUMBER 13603
FIVE CENTS
New Legislation Applies Minimum to Island
Muñoz Asked Series Of Questions If Governor Favors Full Independence For Puerto Rico By PAUL BABRISON WASHINGTON, March 11. (PU> ' - All indications today were that whether a battle will be fought on the House floor to make the new minimum wage law apply to Puerto Rico may depend on Governor Lula Muñoz Marin. The new bill was "tested by the House Labor Committee last night. It is expected to reach the House floor for consideration within two weeks. As passed, the bill establishes a minimum wage of 75 cents per hour for the mainland. The current minimum is forty cents. The bill provides that specific committees in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands may recommend to the Department of Labor, minimums below the national 75 cents. This is" what has been done in accordance with current law. Puerto Rico does not have to pay the minimum of forty cents. It is by no means certain, however, that the members of Congress who have fought for Puerto Rico to be treated in the same manner as the mainland will give up their struggle. For example, Rep. Thomas J. Lane, D-Masschusetts, has introduced legislation to implement the mainland minimum wage in Puerto Rico. He has also written a letter to Governor Muñoz asking him to answer a series of questions about the Puerto Rican economy. Lane's letter was prompted by a speech read by Muñoz before a bicameral session of the Island Legislature on February 23. On that occasion, according to the newspapers, Muñoz said: "We must clarify the situation with regard to the American Inverslopes in Puerto Rico. It is not the philosophy of the Government over which I preside, to seek the closing of factories in the United States, so that they may be installed in Puerto Rico." Recalling this statement in his letter to Gov. Lane said, "I am interested in getting more detailed information on this issue, which is of vital importance to the textile district I represent in Congress. For the sake of my constituents, would you kindly answer the following questions for me" (Lane represents the Lawrence District of Massachusetts, a textile manufacturing center). Lane's questions '1. Are you in favor of complete Independence for Puerto Rico? "2. What is the total amount of subsidies granted by the United States to Puerto Rico, in each of the following years: 1946-1947-1948? "3. Have you ever corresponded with, or given any interviews to, any fabric manufacturer in Lawrence, Massachusetts, on the subject of setting up a textile mill in Puerto Rico? "4. What is the minimum wage on the Island? "Is organized labor active in Puerto Rico? If so, to what extent is it active, and do you agree with collective bargaining agreements? "6. Does the Government of Puerto Rico pay any of its taxable income to the United States Treasury? 7. What is the yield of the Government-owned factories in Puerto Rico? 8. For what term of years does your Government grant exemptions from income and property taxes to United States Industrialists who purchase or build factories in Puerto Rico? "9. May articles produced in Puerto Rico be exported to the continental United States free of customs duties? 10. Has any second-hand textile machinery arrived in Puerto Rico from Massachusetts and New Hampshire during the past year? If so, kindly give me the details." Fernós Could Answer The answers to a few of these questions could be given promptly by Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern. Indeed, Fernós answered some of them in his testimony before the House Ways and Means Committee earlier this week. However, Lane is not a member of the Committee and did not hear what Fernós said. Fernós told the Ways and Means group that: L Puerto Rico does not pay duties to the Federal Government, but withholds Federal duties on items produced in Puerto Rleo that are sold on the mainland. (Question number 6). 1 No duties are assessed on Puerto Rican products exported to the mainland. (Question 9). (Continued on page 12, Col. 1)
Gubitchev Invoked Diplomatic Charge
g J ■ A Vulentine A. Gubitchev (Isqulerda), 3? years old, and Judith Copion, 27, who appeared before a New York court yesterday on charges of stealing information from the Government. The Sephlorite Coplon was an employee of the Department of Justice and Gubitchev worked for the Soviet delegation to the United Nations. The former was released on bail and the latter, also on bail, pleaded diplomatic immunity. He challenged the court, claiming he did not want court-appointed counsel, Judith Coplon, pleaded not guilty to the charges of disloyalty against him. While Russian Engineer Refuses to Answer Court NEW YORK, March 11 (PU)-Valentine Gubitchev, Russian engineer and suspended United Nations employee, pleaded in court today that he had diplomatic immunity. The beautiful Judith Coplon, an employee of the Department of Justice, arrested jointly with the Russian, pleaded that she had diplomatic immunity.
arrested jointly with the Russian, pleaded innocence. Her trial was set for April 1, and her $20,000 bail was held. Shortly thereafter she posted bail and was released. Gubitchev. addressing Federal Judge Simon H. Rifkind, through an interpreter. He indicated that he did not want relations with the American judiciary, nor did he want the court to appoint a lawyer for him, even though he said he could not afford one. "I consider myself a foreigner, and a member of the diplomatic profession, and I consider the accusations made againstUfikrfBMik to be a provocation for Certain purposes," he said. "Therefore, I will refuse to answer the Court's questions." Judge to Assign Counsel The judge said he would assign her a lawyer, and summoned the 32-year-old Russian engineer for March 14, Miss Coplon and Gubitchev were brought to court together. She pleaded not guilty to all three charges, saying "not guilty" in a very weak voice. Gubitchev continued to be held on $100,000 bail. She was asked if she had anything to say. He shook his head no, and "walked out of the room. The defendants did not look at each other in court. Miss Coplon and the Russian arrived at the Federal Court in a black Hmoslna. Miss Coplon. in the "front seat, was between two sergeants-at-arms. After Miss Coplon, three other Federal prisoners got out. The last to exit the vehicle was the Muscovite, who took his handcuffed hands "L face to evade the photographers. State Observers Present in court were observers from the United Nations and the State Department. Gubitchev is an engineer employed by the United Nations in the construction of its permanent quarters in midtown Manhattan. He was suspended from (Cont. on 1st page 12, Col. 8).
University Celebrates 46th Anniversary Today Ceremonies Will Be Held On Campus. Rector Makes UPR History -Mey celebrates forty-six years of the University of Puerto Rico's "existence. The university administration is celebrating this 46th anniversary of the institution with a ceremony on the University's campus, to which the public has been invited. As reported by the Director of Social"" and Cultural Activities of the UPR. "Mr. José Gueit, the administration has postponed the "academic event" of celebration for the fiftieth anniversary, when the University turns half a century old. As special events, a concert will be given tonight by the Sinfonista and the Spanish artists Lo" Bocharos and the Mexican artists Hermanas Aguila will participate in the program. Fireworks will also be set off. A special issue of the Universidad newspaper, 40,000 copies of which have been prepared, will also circulate today on the occasion of the anniversary. About two thousand students from the schools of Rio Piedras will leave today in a chartered train and 20 buses to attend the intercollegiate competitions to be held at the Colegio de Agricultura de Mayagüez. The visit is in reciprocity ■ 1a visit made by Mayagüez students on the occasion of the Intercollegiate Games held last year at the University. Statements by the Rector The Rector of the University has issued the following statements(Cont, on page 12, Col. 7)
News Digest
Pan American offers improvements and lower rates, - - - - José Luis Nieves sustained yesterday the accusation for alleged robbery. - An agreement between the APA and the workers is imminent today. - - - Mudos visited yesterday the area affected by tidal waves in Arecibo. Gubitchev yesterday challenged the U.S. justice system. - - - Royall says war with Russia will be avoided, but not at cost of eeder rights or principles University'turns 48 years old today. Health extends* to Oayey the campaign on peddling. Truman asked for 180,000,000 to aid Indians. - - - - H Grave diggers' strike ended in New York. - - - the. School Directors Association will meet next hand 24. - - - Two years imprisonment imposed on four who beat up old man.
Federal bill allocates funds to the island for school". Maysonet brothers sentenced to life in prison. - Thomas J. Lañe filed a bill applying the federal minimum wage to the island. - - - Work begins at Sanatorium on Friday 18, - - - - New jail to be built in Aibonito, - - - - Retired industrialist encourages creation of white-collar workers union. - - - McCormick believes Borieuas should have a chance to choose their government, - - - - Roy continues Christian and Missionary Allanas events. - Federal Council of Protestant Igieelas agrees to discuss a plan of action with the Vatican. - - - The population of the United States reached 147X8,ooo. - Pitteburgh team alleges wrong decisions; withdraws from Golden Gloves competition,
APA-Workers Agreement Imminent Today
These Have Lowered Wage Demands Yesterday Negotiations Failed After Fifteen Straight Hours of Labor By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of El. MUNDO Creéeae Imminent that the paites reach today " an agreement, " although after more than fifteen consecutive hours" of conver "aclone", the producers and workers"" of the Sugar Industry could not reach an agreement, to put an end to the strike decreed since Monday"". Once again, the efforts of the Labor Commissioner, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecla, and the conciliator Adolfo Collazo, crashed against the positions taken by the Sugar Producers Association, the Sugar Union and the Free Federation. But for their part, the Union and the FLT reduced their "demand" for an increase in wages. From the minimum of 75 cents an hour that they demanded for the factory workers, they lowered it to 58; and from the 50 cents an hour that they demanded for the field workers, they reduced it to an increase of 8 cents a day. Rtiacahan Acuerdo Most of the time was spent by the representatives of the Sugar Union and the FLT trying to agree on the minimum demand to be made of the producers. A deep disparity of criteria" between the leadership of the Federation and that of the Union "on this point, threatened the unity existing between both" organizations, which finally agreed to "adopt the above" mentioned formula. This issue, and the wages granted by the Land Authority to its federated workers in the Cambalacha center, were the subject of long discussions within the agreement committee of the FLT and the APA. The TA granted a minimum wage of 82-112 cents per hour to the sugar mill workers, in the agreement signed a few days ago with the FLT. Mr. Pedro Vega Berrios, president of the SA; Mr. Armando Rivero, secretary; Senator Ramón Barreto Pérez, president of the CGT Inc. and Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl, legal representative of the Union, took an important part in this matter. On behalf of the FLT, Mr. Nicolás Noguera Rivera, "general tightening: and Mr. Irene Torre Re "to. t Ramos' Proposal It was Mr. Ramos Antoninl who proposed that labor should agree on the minimum demand to be made to the employers. He suggested taking into consideration the agreement signed by the FLT with the Land Authority, but applying to it the different factors that exist between the TA and the private lndu "tri", both economically and administratively. He also pointed out the changes in this year in the income received by the private industry, due to the drop in the price of sugar honeys, as well as other new expenses, such as the contribution for employment insurance. After considering statistics and agreeing on the reduction of the demands, the proposal was submitted to the APA with the aforementioned result. It was then agreed that the Commissioner would report to the Governor the result of the negotiations, and recommend to the Governor to issue a proclamation declaring a state of emergency in the industry. If this is done by the Governor, the Minimum Wage Board will then proceed to issue the new decree setting minimum wages for the industry. The Joint Committee of the FLT and the Union will then meet to agree on the resumption of negotiations with the APA.
(Cont. on page 12. Col- 8)
New Improvement Works at Sanatorio Insular will start on the 18th
Next Friday 18 will be laid the first stone of the Anti-Tuberculosis Hospital, a center to eonitruirae on the grounds of the Sanatorio Insular, In the ceremony will be in charge of the blessing the Chancellor of the Bishopric, Monsignor Rafael Grovas. The description of the ceremony will be transmitted by WIPR radio station, from 3:30 PM to 4:30 PM. M. to 4:30 P. M" also taking part will be the Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge Jiménez; the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Póna; and a representative of the firm that will carry out the works, Méndez, Grillas, Galib, Nolla y Márquez, Inc. It is estimated that the new Anti-Tuberculosis Hospital will be finished by the beginning of 1952. After the groundbreaking ceremony, the contractors have 900 days to deliver the work, according to the bidding documents awarded to silos. |
Once the work is completed, it will facilitate the accommodation and care of 800 new patients, including 200 minors. These works include 20 pavilions, three buildings for dining rooms, and three buildings for administration. The area to be expanded will also be provided with additional corridors and streets, as well as electricity, water and sewage systems. Federal Aid The enlargement of the Insular Sanatorium was approved this year by the Federal Public Health Service, and the contribution of the Federal Gov. Federal Government will provide a third part of the cost of the project, estimated at approximately four million dollars. The approved federal contribution, already approved, amounts to the sum of $81333,000. In its estimated project cost (Continued on page 12, Col. 5)
Federal Bill Allocates Island For Schools
Prolongs Aid For Six Years - Puerto Rico Would Have First Year Provision, S1,380,000 By Benjamin Santana EL MUNDO Staff Writer Puerto Rico will have $1,480,000 for school construction next year; and about $7,410,880 for the subsequent five years, if a certain measure proposed by the Federal Administration is approved. This was reported yesterday by the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mnrinno Vlllaronga, after having testified before the Puerto Rico House of Representatives' Treasury Committee on several educational problems. Benjamin Ortiz, summoned him to explain the details of another project for the construction of schools, under consideration by the National Congress, in which he ignores k lila, as reported by EL MUNDO in last Tuesday's edition. The coml "lonado Vlllaronga also stated about the "Ituaclón created, as far as "educational facilities" "" refers, by the" new urbanization" such as Puerto Nuevo, Caparra Height" and other". The National Senate Bill R34, provides an allocation of $150,000,000 for school construction in <395 dlatrltoa located in 39 states and the territory of Alaska. It is intended to provide federal assistance to those schools whose educational facilities have been affected as a result of the impact of federal activities. - According to information published by the Congressional Record Journal, the Federal Public Works Administration, the agency that reviewed the situation during the month of July, apparently did not receive reports from Puerto Rico, Hawaii and nine other states. The comí "leñad" Villa roa ga nhega that ai this agency made the satudio in the lila, at no time requested any report from the Department of Instruction. He also alleges that in 1943, when he was Commissioner of Instruction "1 Dr. José M. Gallardo, the Department of Instruction sent a report related to the impact of federal activities on the educational facilities of Puerto Rico. He said that although he did not report any "normal situation that could be considered critical, eight school districts were reported to be directly or indirectly affected. The Other Bill Senate Bill 287 is an Administration bill with a high likelihood of approval. It appropriates a total of $98,000,000 for school construction in the states during the next fiscal year, and $490,000,000 for the subsequent 5 years. The bill allocates $2,000,000 for the first year; and $10,000,000,000 for the following five years. According to a study made by Commissioner VlUaronga, which has already been submitted to the Governor, Puerto Rico would receive $1,480,000 minimum for the first year and $7,410,000 for the five subsequent years. The National Senate is still considering the Federal National Education Assistance bill, according to Mr. Vlllaronga. According to the latest reports received by the Department of Instruction, the campaign to have Puerto Rico treated, within the provisions of the bill, on a parity with the 48 states, is growing throughout the Island. The bill allocates $300,000,000,000 of which Puerto Rico would receive about $4,000,000,000 if it is treated as a possession and about $25,000,000 (Cont. on page 12. Col. 1).
Deadline for Filing Income Tax Returns Extended to March 31 - The Deadline for Filing Income Tax Returns Will Be Extended to March 31
Plot Uncovered in Athens to Assassinate General Fleet VHL MT This photograph shows Lieutenant General (then) Commanding General Jame" A. Van Fleet, head of the American military mission in Greece, against whose life a plot has been uncovered, conversing with Captain Roy L Rainey, commander of the transport "Akeafleld", The Head of the American Military Mission in Greece Used to Go Out Alone. Minister of Public Order Announced Arrest of Communist Complicators ATENA5, March 11 (PU) - The Minister of Public Order, Constantin Jlenti, announced that "a conspiracy to arrest Lieutenant General James A. Van Fleet, head of the American military mission in Greece, had been uncovered and foiled.
Rentls attributed the conspiracy to the Communists, and said that "n had made several arrests. He reported that the police arrested all the people connected with the plot before they could carry it out. Those arrested admitted they were preparing to assassinate Van Fleet between March 20 and March 25, Rentls said. The period set for the assassination had been proclaimed Labor and Victory Week, sponsored by Mrs. Henry F. Grady, the American ambassador's wife. Travels Always Alone American authorities "qul said they knew nothing of the plot. Rentis did not say how "n the conspirators intended to assassinate Van Fleet, nor how many were involved in the affair. Van Fleet usually travels in Greece alone, or with a handful of American" and Greek clerks. The Lieutenant General has been under vitriolic attack from the "book Greece" radio, which has accused him of "assassinating" several arrested Communist leaders. The plot to assassinate him, however, was the first announced against his life during more than a year of service in Greece. A note written in lipstick was recently found on his bedroom door at the Gran Bretaña Hotel, but it turned out that he had been killed. (Cont. *on page 12. Col. 1) Muñoz Visited Affected Area Arecibo Provides Shelter For Tidal Wave Victims The Governor and the Commissioner of Instruction yesterday adopted measures to provide temporary shelter for the three hundred families stranded as a result of the heavy tidal waves in Arecibo, Yesterday afternoon they visited the site of the disaster, and decided to use the schools as a shelter. Commissioner Vlllaronga said that "1 Department of Instruction has placed at the disposal of the affected families, the Roosevelt School, of that locality. This school, which consists of thirty classrooms, is located near the area affected by the tidal waves. The Commissioner of Instruction also instructed the Arecibo Superintendent of Schools to assign teachers to assist in the rehabilitation tasks. According to a press release from Fortaleza, the Mayor of Arecibo, Mr. Darlo Goitía, communicated with the Mayor of Arecibo, Mr. Darlo Goitía. Darlo Goitía, telephoned Colonel Arrillaga, Military Aide to the Governor, to inform him that in Jarealos, Arecibo, the tidal wave had destroyed about two hundred houses and that the residents of that place were without any shelter. Colonel Arrillaga immediately informed the Governor of the situation and by instructions of the latter, the police was called (Cont. on page 12, Col. 4).
New Jail To Be Built In Aibonito Mayor Rodriguez Says Deed For Purchase Of Land Has Already Begun Very soon the construction of the new jail in Aibonito will begin, as informed yesterday by Mr. Edelmiro Rodriguez, mayor of Aibonito. A commission of Aibonito, integrated by Mayor Edelmiro Rodriguez and Ramon Pont Flores, Manuel Lupiañes, and Manuel Lupiañes. Manuel Lupiañes, and Manuel Luplaftes, son, visited EL M "N¡DO to make known "u" efforts in relation to the construction of the new jail in Aibonito. The Mayor informed that yesterday the deeds for the acquisition of the lot where the new building is to be built were "proven. Edelmlro Rodríguez revealed that since 1948, when law 185 was approved, which allocates $10,000 dollars for the construction of the Aibonito jail, the municipal administration has been trying to carry out this work. He said that for several times, the plans submitted were not "tested by the Planning Board, alleging, according to the Mayor, that it was located near residential and commercial sites. It was also reported that a (Continued on p. 12, Col. 8)
In the morning session of the Senate, Senator Ernesto Carrasquillo filed a petition for the Emergency War Program to send him a list of the employees paid by said program, who are assigned to work in the offices of the lumberjacks and lot representatives. Carrasquillo also requests that he be informed of the salary earned by each of said employees and the time they have been working during the current fiscal year 194849, the obligations imposed by the Emergency War Program on said employees and the date on which said employees have ceased to work, and the date on which some of them have ceased to work. Malaria Appropriation The Senate passed on third reading "1 P. S. 149. appropriating to the Department of Health the sum of 1150,000 for the continuation of the House".
House" Passed Last Night Amendment" Bill Imposes SI0,000 Fine or Jail Sentence on Evaporators By J. M. García Calderón EL MUNDO Staff Writer The House of Representatives "proved "noch", after a prolonged meeting of the "k" parliamentary majority. "1 House Bill 4t5, proposed by )" Administration, which amends the Income Tax Law and declares it a public offense to fail to file returns, conceal or fail to pay income tax. The approval of the bill was preceded by numerous consultations with the Treasurer, Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, and officials of La Fortaleza and of the Legal Division and the Income Tax Bureau of the Department of the Treasury. Benjamín Ortlz, floor leader of the House Popular Majority, explained the measure, including its purpose and how it will affect those administrative proceedings pending before the Treasurer of Puerto Rico. The bill extends until March 31 of this year, the deadline to file returns and pay the income tax. Penalty of Jail Disn" the bill specifically provides that any person who violates the regulations promulgated for the payment of the tax, or who fails to file or file the income tax return, shall be punished with a fine of not less than $10,000 or jail for a term of not more than one year, or both penalties, plus the costs of the proceeding, at the discretion of the court. It also provides that its provisions shall not affect any administrative or judicial proceeding, whether initiated or not, for the imposition of administrative fines under the provisions of Section 77 of the Income Tax Act of 1924, prior to its amendment by this Act. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided in the Income Tax Act of 1924, as subsequently amended, any person required by said Act to file a return or pay a tax, may file the same or pay the tax on or before March 31 of this year. According to the bill, any person required by this Act to collect, account for, and deliver in payment any tax imposed by this Act, who voluntarily fails to collect or to account for and deliver in payment such tax, and any person who willfully attempts in any manner to evade any tax imposed by this law or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, be guilty of a felony and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $19,900 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years, both penalties at the discretion of the Court. Bill 415 was sent last night to the Insular Senate, where it was to be immediately considered, since it was the Legislative Assembly's intention that the bill be in the Governor's Office today, Saturday, to be immediately signed by the Chief Executive Officer, in order for it to take effect immediately. Afternoon Session For more than four hours yesterday in a joint session of the House and Senate Treasury Committees, House Bill number 415, by Representative Benjamin Ortlz, which makes it a public offense to leave (Cont. on page 12, Col. 2)
Senate Approved Malaria Control Funds
malaria control work in Puerto Rico. Senator Triaría asked to be informed if there was any malaria control program, since he was unaware of it. The Vice President of the Senate, Luis A. Negrón López, reported extensively on the work being done to that end, ending his report with an indication of the achievements of said program. Senator Negrón López informed that according to statistics provided by the Department of Health, during the years between 193241 and 1947, the following reduction in morbidity (number of malaria cases per 1,000 inhabitants) was achieved: Municipality 193341 1947 Guayama 810.3 93.1 Patillas 472. 155.1 Sta. Isabel 459.2 36.8 Arroyo 438.9 S2.8 (Continued on page 12, Col. 5),