THE ROUND
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Modestly cloudy to occasionally cloudy mostly during the afternoon and evening hours today. IN SAN JUAN, A1ER; High, 81 degrees; low, 70 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 28.84 inches of mercury.
NÜBVA YORK, Dec. 1. (FU) - In the afternoon today ee reported the" someone toa temperature": New York, 41; Chicago. M; Wáahlngton,. "8; Miami. 78. FrMieelnnM for tomorrow in New York and neighboring doubt?": "oleede with ¡a highest temperature carea of 44 n
TOMORROW NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
Enterad as second class matter, Post Office. San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 3, 1949
NUMBER 13864
FIVE CENTS
Effects Of Migration To Be Studied
Labor Conference Calls for Ban on Employment of Foreigners WASHINGTON 7(Bmhre 2. - (Special to THE WORLD). - The tenth labor law conference, organized by Secretary of Labor Maurice Tobin, passed a resolution calling for an end to the importation of foreign agricultural laborers into the Nation, according to Labor Commissioner F. Sierra Rerdecfa. The Conference unanimously approved recommendations that, if approved by Congress, will provide additional guarantees and protection for Puerto Rican workers coming to the mainland. Sierra said he was "deeply satisfied" with these recommendations. It is significant, Sierra said, that many of the recommendations approved by the Conference aimed at improving the conditions of workers in the United States are now laws in Puerto Rico. The resolution states that foreign workers "are not presently needed in the United States" and recommends ) A. Immediate cessation of the Importation of foreign workers, except those covered by the Displaced Persons Act. Other Provisions B. The enactment of laws imposing penalties on employers/employing workers who have entered the country illegally. Cy The appointment by the PresldyKW of a commission to investigate the illegal entry of Mexican laborers, and its effect on employment levels and opportunities for domestic workers. <Puerto Rican workers are part of the American labor army and all recommendations apply equally to Rico and the various states). The Conference called for state and federal legislation aimed at regulating by licensing, the operations of private agents B' of contractors who recruit migrant workers in order to protect workers against false information, against promises of non-existent jobs, and against the possibility of their having to face undesirable conditions. This new legislation would require employers who employ immigrant workers to register with the Department of Labor before recruiting non-mainland workers, as in the case of those hired in Puerto Rico, and require the Department of Labor to determine whether living and working conditions are satisfactory before being granted permission * to bring in the workers. Transportation Problem Sierra said that one of the most important recommendations is to amend the Interstate Commerce Act and state laws governing motor vehicles to ensure convenient and safe transportation for immigrant workers. He added that such legislation would require higher levels of safety for Puerto Rican workers migrating to the mainland by air and more adequate allocations for federal and state employment services. Puerto Rico does not yet enjoy this service, but discussions have already taken place to extend it to the island. . . The enactment of laws authorizing state labor departments to regulate worker housing, grant licenses to labor camps and develop labor codes so that workers will not be threatened by undesirable conditions, minimum wage, minimum wage extension, effective payments and wage collection laws covering all migrant workers, including farmers, is recommended. migrant workers, including farmers, as well as the extension of the Fair Labor Standards Act to agriculture.to agriculture. It is also recommended that workers' compensation laws be amended to cover farmers. Unemployment compensation laws should also be amended to cover farmers.
Armed Services to Separate 8,000 Officers Soon
WASHINGTON, Dec. 2. - (PU)- It was revealed yesterday that the Army, Navy and Air Force will separate at least 8,000 officers from their active duty rosters in the next few months. The announcement of the sharp reduction among two officers of the three services was made as the Army began discharging post-war draftees nine months ahead of schedule. Both measures are part of the economy campaign ordered by Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson. The Army reported that 1,300 of its reserve officers have been notified that their active duty service will end nine months earlier.
The Air Force said that about 3,000 reservists will be discharged soon, and that an additional 2,500 will be given the opportunity to leave the service or enter a no-fly status, receiving lower pay. The Navy said it has notified 950 reserve officers that they will be discharged over the next few months unless they wish to remain in the Navy as enlisted men,
Pilot's License Canceled After Plane Crash in Salinas Point
CAB Orders Captain Wakefield May Apply for Another in June. - Order Effective Day 21
By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of El. MUNDO The Civil Aeronautics Board cancelled last Wednesday the license of Captain Lee Howard Wakefield, according to the Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco. Captain Wakefield, who may apply for a new license within the next few months, was the pilot who flew the aircraft that crashed in Punis Salinas, five months ago, killing three Puerto Ricans*. The resolution, which consists of 19 pages, is signed by the regional examiner of the CAB, Albert H. Ruppar. and appears as plaintiff D. W. Rentze|, the administrator, The judgment revoking Wakefield's certificate will be effective on the 21st of this month. Before that date he must return his certificate. i After June 21, 19S0 he may, however, apply for a new pilot's certificate, provided he returns the one now cancelled, as provided in the judgment. Charges Charged The Civil Aeronautics Board charged pilot Wakefield with the following: 1 - Pilot Wakefield operated a civil airplane between Newark, New Jersey, and Miami, Florida, knowing that the weather was not favorable and that one of the aircraft's wings was in poor condition. 2 - By the same date - June 4 and 5 - Wakefield Pilot To Cancel 50 Carrier Certificates It Was Resolved rI Affirm TA Could Give Adequate Service By M. nTeVEÁ RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO f The Public Service Commission will cancel the provisional certificates of about fifty independent bus carriers operating on routes served by the Transportation Authority. This was agreed upon in a meeting held between the General Administrator of the Transportation Authority, Salvador V. Caro, and the President of the Public Service Commission, Lic. Toledo. According to our information, the agreement was prompted by the fact that the Commission was notified by the TA that the company is in a position to adequately serve the needs of public transportation in the metropolitan area with the acquisition of new units, the rehabilitation of many others, and for having an additional number of units in the process of repair. The Public Service Commission, in view of the situation reported, dispatched a number of its Mechanical Inspectors, with the task of making a general inspection of 1*8 units of the TA and to inform in turn *1 the same was in conditions to assume the responsibilities of the transportation service of the metropolitan area adequately. Upon completion of the inspection, it was found that the Transportation Authority had 239 units in adequate operating condition: it had received 10 new units, and had 30 units under repair, which would be in operating condition in a short period of time. In light of the report rendered by the Commission's Inspectors, the two officials (Toledo and Caro) met to consider the situation, and an agreement was reached to grant provisional permits to independent carriers with vehicles capable of carrying more than ten passengers, until the TA was able to meet the transportation needs of the metropolitan area. It is expected that early next week the Public Service Commission will proceed to notify the holders of such certificates in accordance with the terms under which they were granted, (Cont. on p. 18, Col. 5).
Mr . I my ■ BB D. W. HENTZEL was negligent in failing to cancel the flight at Newark New Jersey, and then at Miami, Florida, despite knowledge of the above deficiencies. 3 - On June 7, 'Wakefield operated the same aircraft on a flight originating in San Juan, Puerto Rico, the aircraft being overloaded by approximately 2,473 pounds in excess of what it could carry. ' 4 - On this flight the aircraft did not carry life preservers in "uficlent? quantity for all" passengers (Continued on p. 16, col. 8) Silver Factory Will Open Here * ... > Fnr Rurlen E. Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO, William Spratling, a businessman from Mexico, revealed yesterday at a press conference that a new factory for fine silver products will be installed in southwestern Puerto Rico by March 1950. Mr. Spratling, who is on the island at the invitation of the Tourism Board, said that Customs has already accepted Spratling Fibers, which "is equivalent to the sterling brand, although much finer". Although he did not mention name" and authorized capital for the new corporation, the "eftor Spratling a "egured that* it was already formed, Puerto Rican capitalists having been included 'among the partners. Advantages of Puerto Rico The businessman said that there are three reasons why Puerto Rico has been selected to develop the silver industry. First, he mentioned the abundance of workers with manual skills to operate in silver work. He then expressed that "Puerto Rico was at the moment of a birth of industries and ideas, whose only parallel would be the period between 1925 and 1930 in Mexico City, when the integration of the indigenous population was encouraged through the formation of rural schools, industrial schools, etc." (Cont. on p. 16 Col. 4).
Prosecutors Investigate Rio Piedras Municipality's Expenditures; Local Police Reorganized
Retailers allege that they will suffer substantial losses due to yesterday's order by the Supply Management to lower the price of butter, according to Mr. Manuel Borrero, counselor of the Puerto Rico Retailers Union. - Mr. Borrero indicated that the existing butter in the local market was purchased by the retailers at a price that fluctuates between $16, $17 and $18, and they are now forced to sell it in accordance with the new prices set by Supply. The UDPR Councilor stated that he was very surprised to read that retailers in the metropolitan area reported retail prices for this product, which fluctuate between 22 and 24 cents per pound. He indicated that for the past four months butter has been sold in the metropolitan area at a lower price than the one set by the Supply Administration," detailing prices between 17 and twenty cents per pound. He continued informing that proof of this are Jos advertisements that constantly appear in the newspapers offering prices that have always been .17, .18, .19 and .20 ?n the area (Continued on page 16, col. 7).
At
The Soviet State Regulated the Conduct of the Citizen from Cradle to Grave
By Lt. Gen. Walter Bedell Smith 5 -vn- * The Mechanics of a Police State "The Soviet State determines the conduct and activity of Soviet citizens in various ways, Educates the Soviet people in a communist morality pro. pítu of the system, which introduces a series of legal norms governing the life of the population, imposing prohibitions, establishing incentives, fixing punishments for the violation of these norms. The conduct and activity of the Soviet people are also determined by the force of public opinion, which is created by the action of numerous public organizations. The main agencies in the task of creating public opinion are the Communist Party and the Soviet State, which, through various means, formulate public opinion and educate the workers in a spirit of t,oclallsta consciousness." I am particularly impressed by this introductory paragraph, because I think it is the most sua. ve definition of the national reglmentadon I have ever read, especially if one takes into account the source from which it comes. I eonié it verbatim from Edition Nt|m. 4 of the "Bolshevik Moscovite", 1927, and cons-
It is thus a Soviet description of the omnipresent police state - a system in which the State begins to determine and rule the conduct and activity of its citizens almost from the cradle and continues to determine and rule them to the grave. The eomu*
nl "ta leadership does not believe in the ability of the people to rule their own lives or to govern the world. I" was surprised at the evident "certainty with which" party members subscribe to this theory and the methods employed" to educate the people "in a spirit of political awareness. Dq. during the" first" day" of our" relationship" with Ruala, when the" relations" between" each other and Jos Soviet functionaries were still friendly and even frank, Marshal Sokolovsky spent a weekend with me at my headquarters in Frankfurt, Germany. During our conversation I learned about the methods of political repression that the Communists were already employing in the Central European area. Sokolovsky, who is an intelligent and honest man according to aua prlnclploa, looked at me with an open look and said, "I don't see why you are censoring. We're not doing anything in those countries that we're not also doing in our own." The Roller Gun In his "Spoon River Anthology," Edgar Lee Masters you have an epitaph of a man who made it all the way to power with only one brace. Said epitaph reads in part: - ...a nation can never be good Nor reach biqji, IF its strong and wise men Have not a roller To use against fools and dé(biles. This description comes as ani(Continued on p. 14, col. 1)
Treasurer Descartes Explains Scientific Appraisal r i t ■ Of > - nr I /h L 'Sbf A '■ K 4 Ja-yt * Á ¿wat Al W ■■ The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, explained yesterday to representatives of a group of interested agencies the scope of the scientific appraisal that is being carried out. From left to right: T.R. Marshall, of the Chicago Public Service Administration Service; David A. Rodrigue, Chief of the Cadastre and Scientific Appraisal Division of the Treasury Department; Treasurer Sol Luis Descartes; Deputy Treasurer Francisco de Jesús; and Thomas Jacobi, of the Chicago Public Service Administration Service (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Says Law Will Be Amended To Conform To New Program Meeting Convened Solicitation Chamber Of Commerce And Federation Of Property Owners. Answered Questions By M. Nieve" Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO The law for the appraisal of property will be amended to conform to the scientific appraisal system carried out by the island's Department of Treasury. I was informed by the Treasurer of Port Rlee, Sol L. Desearte,
"at the meeting held "request 1 * of the Chamber of Commerce and of the >>d "raclón d" Proprietary" and which was attended by representatives" of a" twelve entity"" Industrial"", com?relahs, financial" and professionals. Treasurer Descartes began the meeting by explaining the "big" feature" the "fine", "guideline" and procedures of the scientific appraisal system carried out by the "Cadastre and Scientific Appraisal Division" of the Treasury Department, having raised a number of "questions" about the system. A question raised by the Hon. J. J. Ortlz Alibrán, who "ollc(ooked for guidance as to how the system will work, based on the fact that the current Law gives absolute discretion to the property appraiser when the appraisal is conducted for tax purposes, prompted the Treasurer's statement that the Law will be amended to "Justarla "1 new system. Muhteeorere Directs Meeting Descartes was present at 1" meeting until closing d" the dores of the mrdiorila, ruando left the premises leaving the "ubtesorero Franrlsro de Jesus in the direction riel arto. 1 ' , Mr. Mariano Mari, ri? the Asorlarión (í" Farmers, made reference to the Tribunal de Apelaciones d" Contributions "I said that the owner rie a property was granted 30 days to appeal the appraisal that was fixed to his propisriad. s Mar! said that the Tribunal de' Appeals of Contributions had such a character of Tribunal, i that was composed rie lawyers - only, being necessary utill- - zar it" to serve them of a lawyer to be able to take any case to its consideration. He further stated that this body is only within the reach of the large landowner, making it impossible for the countryman and the landowner to have access to its services. He compared the Tax Appeals Tribunal to the old Board of Revision and Equalization, in which he said that farmers and their servi(continued on p. 13, col. 7)
Coffee Stocks in U.S. to be Censused Sawyer Says Purpose of Determining Price Increase WASHINGTON, Dec. 2 - (PU) - Charles Sawyer, Secretary of Commerce, announced that the U.S. Census Bureau will immediately conduct a study of coffee stocks in the United States to determine the causes of the recent sharp rise in the price of the commodity. Sawyer said that the Census Bureau had decided that it was in the public interest to conduct the study now. Acting Census Director Phjlip M. Llauser wrote to Senator Guy M. Gillette, Democrat of Iowa, and Chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, informing him of the Department's decision. Gillette had earlier asked the Census Bureau to resume the periodic coffee surveys, which were discontinued in 1947. Emphasizing that the research "had just begun," Gillette appealed to the American consumer to refrain from buying more than he needed. - There is no doubt that the panic buying has contributed to the current price increase," he said. Gillette announced that the Pan American Coffee Bureau in New York had been asked to send an official " Wáshlrtgton to testify before the Subcommittee on Monday. Another hearing on the coffee situation, he said, has been scheduled for December 5 and 12.
H.)Marcano Defines Boricua Obrerismo Objectives in London
By X. O. THALER LONDON, Dec. 2.-(PU)-Hipólito Marcano, representative of the Free Federation of Puerto Rican Workers at the world conference of free labor unions, declared today that his Union wants the new International Free Labor Union to be a strong fighting organization, fighting against the" forces that threaten the free labor unions, no matter where these" threats come from. who has been elected to a seat on the permanent" committee of the conference, said
The new organization should aim not only at combating communist penetration, but also at "another" more "important" goal, he said in an interview. "but also "other" other" more* Te"", such" as the "threat on the part of the" dictatorship" against the free evolution of the" working" unions" and against the" force" reacting" capitalism "in all "ui maiflfe "tacione"." He said that this "has been and will be the mode of thinking adopted by his delegation at the present meeting in London, which is to constitute a free federation of workers' unions" to replace the World Federation of Workers' Unions.
Act Against Witnesses' Escape 'Surveillance at Airport. Prosecutor Says There is Evidence Against N. Diaz Figueroa " Fnr E. RAMIREZ RRAU R?ri "rtor of EL.MUNDO Police Colonel Salvador T. Roig, made "yer change" in the Rio Piedras Police District Command. First Lieutenant Alejandro Rivera Vega, who held the position of assistant chief of the Detective, was transferred interim to Rio Piedras, as district commander, and Lieutenant Jo "é Cost" Olivieri became assistant to the Zone Commander, Captain José Barredo. The Rio Piedras Zone Commander has been appointed to the position of assistant chief of the Rio Piedras Police District. Rio* Pi?riras has two assistants, since first lieutenant Secundinn Vélez also appears as assistant to said Commander. At Police Headquarters it was reported that Lieutenant Costa Olivieri was ill. The guard Hipólito Ortlz, who acted as the back of the Mayor of Rio Piedras, Augusto P. Alvarez, was transferred yesterday to P?. huelas for convenience of the service, according to Police Assistant Guillermo Arroyo, By Jnaé M. Garcia Calderon Fiscal Investigation Prosecutors Jose C. Aponte and Gul. llermo A. Gil were questioning numerous witnesses yesterday in relation to "alleged administrative irregularities" that occurred in the municipality of Rio Piedras. In view of the new evidence collected yesterday, it is expected that important developments will take place in the near future. In anticipation that the person whom the prosecutors intend to question may leave the island, a close watch has been established at the Isla Grande airport. The prosecutors Aponte and Gil "encentraran yesterday the Investigation so. on the book of income and expenses of the Municipality of Rio Piedras, evidence this of the one that" was seized %n the larri" of last Thursday. - In relation to the expenditures, André" Garría, who works as a construction worker for the Municipality of Río Piedras, was summoned yesterday. The interrogation of this man, who was harassed with hundreds of questions for several hours, revolved around a check from the Municipality of Río Piedras that he signed in the name of Juan P. Reye". The check in question was for the amount of $350. "Payment" for Another" Mllra ' - Garcia spoke further ri? payments that he estimated ?n thousand and some ri? dollar?",' and said that the check for 1" amount d? $350 1? had been given to " sign by the secretary riel municipal auditor of Rio Piedras. The witness was also questioned about a private construction site in the Sabana Llana neighborhood of Río Piedras, and the interrogation was conducted by Andres Gar? The interrogation was conducted in the office of prosecutor Baldomcro Freyre, but both his entrance and his exit from said place was shrouded in secrecy. In connection with the criminal investigation into the death of Nicolás Díaz Jiménez, several witnesses who had already testified appeared again yesterday, including BonlUde Cedré, leader of the group fighting Mayor Augusto P. Alvares, and Aníbal rie Jesús, administrator of the Rio Piedra market square. F "r "d "ro of the Revolver Aníbal d"' Jesus was questioned' about the whereabouts of the revolver that he was carrying at the time of the death of Nicolás Dlaa Jiménez- E "ta weapon disappeared, without knowing to date where it is. - According to "e said yesterday,.Aníbal de Jé. "ú" resigned his position as administrator of the Market Square of Rio Piedra", several" hour" before appearing before "! prosecutor Padró Paria. On the other hand, yesterday it was revealed that the mayor Alvarez speaks sent in the night riel last Thursday a' eemisión where the representative Rtu bén Gaztamblde ArrlUaga, offering him the presidency of the Committee Po. pular of Rio Piedra". Alvarea's proposal was rejected by Mr. Gaztamblde Arrlaga, who declared to the commission - which was integrated by Dr. Ramo" Elvira, by Mr. Guillermo Estrella Frgsque. rl and by Assemblyman Antonio Cintron - that the Committee's foundations had been assumed by the Arbitration and Conciliation Commission, which was composed by Dr. Ramo" Elvira, by Mr. Guillermo Estrella Frgsque. rl and by Assemblyman Antonio Cintron - that the Committee's foundations had been assumed by the Arbitration and Conciliation Commission. Arbitration and Concilla, clone and that, in addition, he is on the side of the group that fights the Mayor, Informs the Prosecutor The prosecutor Rafael Padró Parés Informed yesterday to EL MUNDO that there is already enough evidence to file the accusation of murder against Nicolás Dias Figueroa, killer of the popular leader Nicolás Díaz Jiménez, known as Colito. He added that he intended to do so as soon as possible, with him (Continued on page 13, pol. 1) ,
Puerto Rico Raises Sugar Case
My Three Years in Moscow
Requests Price-Raising Quota Hearings End In Washington To Set Quota Consumption By PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, Dec. 2 (PU)-The Department of Agriculture concluded two days of public hearings on sugar that the United States will need at M950,during which all U.S. producer interests proposed a consumption quota of 7,200,000 to 7,250,000 tons next year, and representatives of the major sugar consumers such as the sugar baker, bottler and bottler, as well as representatives of the U.S. sugar industry, the U.S. sugar industry, the U.S. sugar industry, and the U.S. sugar industry, proposed a consumption quota of 7,200,000 to 7,250,000 tons next year."and the candy and butter manufacturers" asked for a quota of 8,098,000 tons. Dudley Smith, vice-president of Ja Asociación ri? Sugar Producers Association, one of the last witnesses to testify, asked the Department to establish a quota that would raise the price of sugar in the United States to one cent. He stated that a quota (consumption of 7,250,000 tons will create market conditions conducive to such a price increase. But he said that if the price does not rise, the quota will be reduced. Current Prices Sugar prices have been averaging almost 5.80 cents per pound for raw and 8.05 cents per pound for refined in the New York market. Smith proposed that the price be nearly 6.80 cents per pound for raw and 9.05 cents per pound for refined," assuming refiners maintain the same price differential. David M. Keiser, president of the Cuban Sugar Council in the United States, asked the Secretary of Agriculture to establish a quota that would be fair to Cuban producers." He also asked the Department of Agriculture to "use its "energetic leadership and prestige to have an international sugar agreement approved promptly. Kaiser also asked the Department to point out any shortfall in sugar production in another area early in the year and to determine as soon as possible the United States' need for Cuban sugar for use in foreign programs such as in occupied Germany and Japan. He indicated that Cuba, under the Sugar Law, is only guaranteed about 2,000,000 tons of the U.S. market, but in the last two years has sent 3,000,000 tons to the United States. He said that the extra million tons, which cost $80,000,000 to produce, had to be retained well into the second half of the year, before the United States indicated that it needed them. Kelser said that """" a "burden for" producers in Cuba to invest $80,000,000 in sugar that has no secure market". Keiser estimated that the Cuban crop for next year will be 5,395,000 short tons, which is 368,000 short tons less than the 1949 crop. This year's hearings were animated by the denunciation of the par (continued on page 16. col. 7) i