THE
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy to clear. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: Maximum temperature, II degree": minimum, 88 degree". Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 29.90 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, April 1. - At today's torda oo recorded the 8ifulentoo temperatures: Chicago, 43: Miami, 84: New York, 44: Wáahlng* ton, 48. Prediction" for New York and neighboring cities: fair weather and little warmer. Temperatures in the morning, in the upper 40s: highs in the afternoon, in the upper 40s. Winds moderate" from the northwest.
MARAÑA JOURNAL
YEAR XXX
Enterad a" second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 2, 1949.
NUMBER 13624
FIVE CENTS
Puerto Ricans in Tomorrow's Recital at Carnegie Hall
j" - QL V" ¿v j ■Mk ; \ <i**a T1* jr ' A \ ¡I 4il ■ _. - - ...... . ■ - ... "-__ _■ a* "I -- .A.. X1U a.. .11... / Ja iaAtalAiula * JaaA "ka\ *1 "flAÜnia
Under the auspices of the Puerto Rican Institute of New York, a recital will be offered tomorrow night at Cernerle Hall in New York City, featuring four well-known Puerto Rican artists, who will demonstrate their skills in their "genre".
genre". They are (above, left to right), the vioUntate Figueroa, the lyric oprano and planista Riña d" Toledo, the bailaHaría Tereaa Acuña and the plañíate Narciao Hgueroa. Other" artlstaa will accompany the aforementioned" in the program.
U.S.A. USA. Says Russia Holds Key to Peace Says Soviet Doesn't Have to Fear Alliance If It Doesn't Plan Aggression By Edward V. Roberts WASHINGTON, April 1" (PU)-A State Department spokesman today forcefully told Russia that that nation has nothing to fear from the North Atlantic Security Pact unless it harbors aggressive designs itself. In reply to the indignant Moscow charge that the Pact-which is to be signed Monday-is a weapon of aggression prepared directly against Russia, he said that the Soviets themselves hold the key to peace. He added that the accusation was not aimed at creating confusion or uncertainty. Tom Connally, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, supported the statement. He said the alliance is a defensive step deemed necessary by the member nations because of past Soviet actions. "Russia has no plans to attack any of these nations," Connally said, "it need have no fear that the treaty will cause it harm. Only aggressors can have fears" of the North Atlantic Pact. The Soviet quarrel was one of the major topics discussed in the continuing meetings between Secretary of State Dean G. Acheson and the foreign ministers of the other nations who are in this capital for the purpose of signing the treaty. Acheson met this morning with French Foreign Minister Robert L. Schuman and Belgian Premier and Foreign Minister Paul Henri Spaak. He spoke of meeting again with Schuman and also conferring with British Foreign Secretary Ernost Bovln. At a luncheon hosted by the National Press Club, Bovln said that "a fundamental principle" of the Pact is that "we will never descend to aggression. To potential aggressors it says: 'Think twice. The last war would not have happened if the aggressors had had to face an equal organization. He says to totalitarianism: 'You have your alaterna. We have to share your world. But don't harbor the idea that you can subvert the face of the world'." At a question-and-answer forum, the British statesman said he did not know whether Stalin was a prisoner of the Polltburo (Soviet Political Bureau.) "The mysteries of the Kremlin," Bovln said, "are as imponotreble to me as they are to the alert American Press." Bovln said that history will consider the signing of the Pact the point on which "mankind took its greatest step toward the proclamation of the great freedoms of the world". He indicated the convenience of an attitude of "calm" in relation to the prepositions tending to the creation of a Pacific Pact, saying that "we would like to see first the definitive congroslonal action on this (the Atlantic Pact)". He used the occasion to defend a $38,000,000 trade treaty with Russia, saying that such a treaty was in line with the decisions of the Economic Cooperation Administration. "We believe," Bovin declared, "that the exclusion of the Iron Curtain kickers from all contacts in the West was not the wisest course of action to curb the retaliation. There are millions of people in many countries who are anxious to see the curtain lifted and ■ <Cont on page 31, Col. 3)
Hoover Commission Recommends Total Liquidation of PRRA Would Use Pitts Plan, Which Davis Says Is Impossible. Interior Decides to Continue Agency "by PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, April 1. (PU)-The Hoover Commission today recommended that the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration (PRRA) be liquidated, and that its remaining functions be placed in the hands of other federal agencies. The Commission recommended the adoption of the so-called "Pitts Plan" of
Pons Investigates Soda In Arecibo Orders Sample To Be Taken Before Students For Alleged Rum Use The Health Commissioner, Dr. Juqn A. Pons, instructed the Department of Health's Bureau of Sanitation and Food to proceed with an investigation of the soda made from ice cream, rum and raisins, which is sold in Arecibo to the public and schoolchildren. Some" day" ago, the" school children of classroom 2 of the fifth grade of the Franklin D Roosevelt School of said city, sent a communication to the Commissioner of Health explaining that since "a long time ago, a soft drink prepared with ice cream, milk, rum and raisins has been sold in Arecibo to the children of this community". The schoolchildren asked if "the small amount of rum that they say this soft drink contains is harmful to the children. A Community Problem They went on to inform Dr. Pons that "in our Community Problems class, we are trying to study the above problem." Questioned yesterday about the Arecibo school children's letter, Dr. Pons said that he has requested an investigation to the Bureau of Sanitation and Food, so that samples of the product in question can be taken to determine the amount of rum it contains. The Health Commissioner said that based on the chemical analysis of the product, it will be possible to clearly determine what the ingredients are. He also said he was interested in being informed by the Bureau of Sanitation (Cont. on page 14.- Col. 8).
The settlement, approved in July 1947 by the Secretary of the Interior, J. A. Krug. However, the director of the Territorial Division, James P. Davis, told the United Press that the operation of the plan had proved impossible. He stated that the Department has therefore rescinded for the time being its intention to liquidate PRRA, and will continue to administer it. The Commission made no recommendation regarding the Virgin Islands Company. However, in a report on federal business enterprises in general, it proposed a series of reforms. The recommendations include the adoption of a uniform statute for all Government business corporations; the conversion of all Government business enterprises into corporations; and the elimination of duplicity in their foundations. Pitta's recommendations The Pian Pltts plan for the PRRA was made by Malcolm E. Pltts. who after making a comprehensive study recommended its liquidation. Pltts recommended: 1. The transfer to the Farmers Home Administration of PRRA's major loans, notes or mortgages on farms and grazing lands. 2. 2. The transfer to the Puerto Rico Homes Authority of loans, notes, mortgages and contracts for the sale of homes and leasehold properties, subject to review by the Federal Homes Authority; and to allow the Island Authority to invest surplus collections in new low-cost home units for a period of 49 years. 3. Allow religious groups and others to acquire PRRA properties that are suitable for their purposes. 4. Transfer land and buildings to the Government, without reimbursement. Allow PRRA one year to dispose of its other properties. Davls said that this plan received (Cont. to P. 11 - Col. 3)
Cuba to Sell All Sugar . Last Zafra Announces U.S. Army Will Buy Some 500,000 Tons HAVANA, April 1, (PU)- Cuba will have no trouble selling its entire 1949 sugar crop at four cents or more, but its marketing problems will become much more difficult in a few hundred years, according to a study by John L.' Forbes, of the brokerage firm of the U.S. Army. Forbes, of the brokerage firm of Merrill, Lynch, Pierece, Fenner and Beane. Forbes told the Press last night that there will be a surplus of about half a million long tons at the end of this year. pqro that the same will be easily placed on the market before the 1980 crop is available. Forbes added that the future of the Cuban economy depends on harvesting* four to four and a half million long tons in the next few years. He stated that the 1948 crop will be about five million - possibly less - compared to the more than six million tons of 1947, and added that the 1949 crop was estimated at four to four and a half million long tons. Sugar Requirements Forbes stated that the U.S. Army's sugar requirements for the occupation zones will approach three hundred thousand long tons this year, but said the Army will buy half a million or more long tons. He warned that the United States - surrounded by a quota barrier - would no longer allow the continuation of prices which do not stimulate sugar production in the U.S. territorial areas. (Cont. on p. 14.- Col. 5).
Island Refiners Take Their Case to the Supreme Court
By Jame" F. Cunningham WASHINGTON, April 1 (PU) - Lawyers for two Puerto Rican refiners today asked the U.S. Supreme Court to force Congress to stop passing laws they say fatten metropolitan refineries at the expense of Puerto Rico. The refining companies, Con- tral Rolg and Western Sugar, said they "freely admit that Congress has great power to regulate commerce between Puerto Rico and the states. But they said it has no right to "arbitrarily" discriminate against Puerto Rico, as it "clumsily" did with the Sugar Act of 1948. Their attorney, Frederick P. Loo, made these allegations in a petition filed with the Supreme Court for a ruling on the constitutionality of the 1948 Sugar Act. / Howard C. Westbrook. Donald Hiss and Daniel M. Gribbon, on behalf of the metropolitan refiners, filed briefs to the contrary, alleging that such a decision is unnecessary. According to the Sugar Law, Puerto Rico could sell a total amount of 1,023,753,000 tons of sugar.
According to the Sugar Act, Puerto Rico could sell a quantity of 1,023,756 tons of sugar per year to the metropolis. Congress provided that only a subquota of 128,033 tons - or about 12.3 percent of the total - could be used for refined sugar. Unfair Quota The Puerto Rico Government says this is unfair, which is why it brought the matter to a court controversy last year over the division of the 1948 subquota between the various Puerto Rican refiners. Rolg and Western were trying to prove that they had not received a fair share of the subquota. The Court of Appeals in November upheld the Puerto Rican refiners' arguments. For procedural reasons, it ruled that a decision on the issue of constitutionality was unnecessary. Both the Government of Puerto Rico and the Secretary appealed to the Supreme Court. The Island Government asked the Court to decide whether or not the Congrooo could impose what amounted to a limit on the amount of sugar the Island could refine. (Cont. on page 14.- Col. á)
Port
Senate Issues Rule On Use Of Funds
Measure Controls Appropriations Also Authorized Public Safety Bills And Porta Coeli Hermitage By S. GALVEZM ATURAN A EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Senate approved yesterday in its session S. 312 to amend Article 109 of the Political Code, regarding appropriations for the fiscal year. According to the amendments introduced, the balances not obligated in the books of the Auditor of Puerto Rico, of the appropriations authorized for a fiscal year, shall be settled or closed in the books of the Auditor within six months following the closing of the fiscal year to which they pertain. Shall Remain On The Books" The bill provides that the credits authorized for the services of a fiscal year that have been obligated in the books of the Auditor of Puerto Rico prior to June 30 of the fiscal year to which they pertain, shall continue on the books of the Auditor for one year after the expiration of the fiscal year for which they were authorized, and thereafter shall not be drawn against them for any concept whatsoever. The foregoing one-year limitation shall not apply to obligations incurred and recorded on the books of the Auditor on or before June 30, 1949. Appropriations authorized for purposes for which no fiscal year is specified shall continue on the books of the Auditor until the purposes for which they were created are fully met, after which time the unobligated balances of such appropriations shall be cancelled by drawing on surplus funds in the prescribed manner. Availability of Funds An amendment was also introduced to the article in reference to the availability of appropriations. It is provided in the bill that, except where otherwise specially authorized by law, the appropriations authorized in the regular sessions of the Legislature shall not be available and shall not be carried on the books of the Auditor before the beginning of the next fiscal year. The appropriations authorized at the extraordinary sessions shall be available upon the enactment of the law authorizing such appropriations, unless otherwise provided by law. AuthoriMn Inspections The Senate yesterday morning passed P, S. 388, on third reading, authorizing the Fire Chief to inspect or cause to be inspected any dwelling house, hotel building, factory, apartment house, theater, and commercial, mercantile or industrial establishment. Likewise, the Fire Chief may require the owner, manager, employer, lessee, representative or occupant of such buildings to make such alterations, repairs and installations as may be necessary against the risk of (Continued on page 14 col. 8.)
News Digest
Senator Glen Taylor sentenced - 180 days in jail. D "woy signs bill banning communist" from holding office" at New York college. Two representatives denounce corruption in public schools. Pone" has been four months without aaeolnatos occurring. Income tax collection reaches 398.81. Taxi drivers' strike broke out in New York. There was Indolent with the Jury's decision that condoned Sanjurjo, during the trial against Bonifacio Dias. Arrived in San Juan group that goes around the world in a brigantine. Botado" Uni'doo says it to Rúala quo not Mono quo fear to the Pacto dol AtlánUco ai not .abriga intanclona" do aggression. Food was confiscated" yesterday in raid on street vendor"". Tom C. CÍark*de "mlente rumor of his resignation. Agreement reached to send several thousand Puerto Rican workers to the United States. They "put" the sale of refro "co in rum on Aroeibo. - The "Roflnadoro" of the lela took -u cace auto to the national Supreme Court. -
Senator Mono asked to eliminate the "communist", the "empowered" of the "unlvonldado". Arturo (Tutti*) Coll pleaded not guilty to violating the Drug Law", in Federal Court. - PAA radio operators go on strike in New York. He "ruled out" arrangements for the training of the "Internal Revenue" agent in Washington. Cuba to sell all its sugar at the last sugar mill. Rita Hayworth and Prince AU Khan's wedding to be held in June. The Senate* passed a bill to regulate the use of the fund, and another to facilitate the restoration of Porta Cooli. The Supreme Pontiff celebrates today his Golden Jubilee oacordotaL The so-called 'Messiah, Krishma Venta, could not enter the Vatican yesterday. The. The House approved an appropriation of $830,000 for public works" to be executed" by the Emergency War Program. The House approved an appropriation of 384,008." in the budget for the current fiscal year. They granted the injunction of Lanlor and Martin requesting "reinstatement in Organized Baseball. - Canons Márque" bsteó a "sncilio en 4 turnee ayor.
Two Representatives Denounce Corruption In Public Schools
Descartes Gets Washington Island Agents to Train
On his return, he will choose officials to take training course for William Dorvllller WASHINGTON, April 1, 2010 (C-Espe-eial to EL MUNDO) - Island Treasurer Sol Luis Descartes today made final arrangements for the training of Treasury Island agents in Washington, D.C., with the U.S. Treasury's Division of Apprehension and Taxation's "Alcohole" Unit. Mr. Descartes told EL MUNDO today. Descartes said he will decide, upon his return to the island, the agents he will send to this capital for the training course. The Island Treasurer returned from New York, where he held conferences with officials of the Federal Reserve System, the National City Bank and the Chase National Bank. He said his lectures focused on matters of mutual interest to these institutions and the island territory. Descartes said his conferences here and in New York were "extremely valuable in the sense that they created opportunities to explore" many techniques for improving the functioning of the Treasury.
4 - ví SOL LUIS DESCARTES I Insular. I "During my stay here I have had the opportunity to meet with functionaries who. correspond with insular functionaries," Descartes said, "and I have established personal connections that undoubtedly (Continued on page 14 col. 1)
Glen Taylor Was Sentenced To Serve 180 Days In Jail Birmingham Court Found Him Guilty Yesterday Of Disorderly Conduct. Senator Says He Will Appeal For ED~ROGER8 BIRMINGHAM. Alabama, April 1 (PU)- Senator Glen Taj'ter, Democrat of Idaho, today faced the possibility of spending ISO days of hard labor in the Birmingham jail. The atecra Healer and Progressive Party candidate for vleapr"-
fSl-||B- VW"""""*"WW U.S. Presidency was sentenced to 180 days in jail and fined $50 when a Birmingham Circuit Court jury found him guilty of disorderly conduct last May. The Healer was charged with disorderly conduct as a result of an argument he had with a Birmingham policeman who stopped him when he tried to enter a door marked for Negroes at a Colored Youth Conference where he was to speak. A very pleased Taylor said he was "very pleased" with the verdict by posting bail to appeal, and left last night by plane for Washington to continue his senatorial duties in Washington. (Taylor arrived in Washington this morning and said he was "not happy" with the way his trial had been conducted. He said his case was treated like any other disorderly conduct case. ("It became "apparent they didn't want to see the case on its merits," he said. "They refused to discuss the segregation issue.") Taylor announced that he would appeal immediately and take his case all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, if necessary, in an effort to have Birmingham's racial segregation laws declared contrary to the Constitution. It will take time It will be a long time before Taylor begins to fulfill his (Cont. to p. 14. - Col. 2)
Agreement Reached: To Move Workers to U.S. - Sierra Accepts S57 Price For Passage - Will Go To Fruit Picking By José M. García Calderón EL MUNDO Staff Writer " The Puerto Rico Department of Labor and the New Jersey Agricultural Federations reached an agreement last Thursday "on the conditions under which between five and seven thousand Puerto Ricans who will go to work in fruit and vegetable picking" in the states of New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware and New Jersey will be transferred to the Continent. Mr. Albin String, representative of the New Jersey Agricultural Federations, and the Commissioner of Labor, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecta, reached an agreement, after a prolonged "agreement.In the talks also participated the Executive Director of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, Mr. Virgilio Ramos. $5,000,000 in wages" According to an authorized source yesterday, the Puerto Rican workers who will import the FA's (Cont. on page 14).
Group That Goes Around the World in Bergantín' Arrives in San Juan
For BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO In an adventurous voyage around the world, twenty intrepid North American sailors arrived in San Juan yesterday. Seventeen months after leaving Gloucester, Massachusetts, in an old "German" brig. The Yankee, a former sailing ship used by the Germans in 1912 as a rescue boat, sailed out of the harbor on November 2, 194, having already completed its circumnavigation of the five great seas. The crew is composed of four women, a child and 15 shoulders that one day decided to suspend their school studies and set sail on one of the most picturesque and daring enterprises. They wanted to know, from their own experience, everything they had read in textbooks about the different races and cultures of the East and the West. They also wanted to see, with their own eyes, the places of famine and desolation resulting from the horrible world conflagration of the past. One of the young navigators, Engineer Alan Pierce, tells us,
Engineer Alan Pierce, tells us that the idea of doing the Via Je came spontaneously. They had heard about the adventures of Captain Irving Johnson, who had circumnavigated the world four times," and they also wanted to experience the thrills of such a round-the-world voyage. After several calls, visits and conversations, in a few days they had already made the necessary arrangements for the trip, each contributing the "modest" sum of $4,880. On November 1, 1947, at exactly 2:00 p.m., they hoisted sail at the port of Gloueeater, Massachusetts, and set sail for the first port of Cape Haiti. Commanding the Yankee, which has pratenuions of resembling Christopher Columbus' Santi Maria, is Captain Johnson, who is accompanied on the voyage by his wife and Robert, an eleven-year-old son. Other members of the officer corps are Stephen Johnson, senior pilot, Ja?k Braidwood, second pilot, Frank Power, senior pilot, and Alan Pierce, engineer. The other crew members are Donal Crawford (eoel(Cont "n lá page 13, Col, 8).
Allude to Dances and Liquor Use House Budget for Rest of Year Will Be . $120,459.38 By JOSE M. GARCIA CALDERON . Two members of the Popular majority in the House, Representative Alfonso Román García, of Fajardo, and Miss María Líber- . tad G6mez, of Utuado, yesterday made serious" denunciations against' public schools. Rep. Román García said, addressing the House, that "the school at the rate we are going "is corrupting in its integral' and moral part." Mr. Román García's harsh comment came after Rep:esentant Gómez, while arguing in favor of House Bill 683, which "strictly prohibits "1" holding halls and banquets in es- . She said she was ashamed of the unpleasant spectacle she had witnessed at a school graduation in a school in a neighborhood of Utuado, where liquor and ballroom dancing had been consumed in a way that was not an edifying example for the children or for the citizens. Ix" Which Provides The bill of Miss Gómez, which was approved on third reading, provides that "when a Superintendent of Schools has knowledge of any infraction of this law in his school district, said official shall notify the Commissioner of Instruction, who in turn shall request from the Attorney General the appointment of a prosecutor to prosecute the offenders before the courts". The bill provides that excluded from 1the prohibitions it establishes are the activities carried out by schoolchildren under the direction of their teachers as part of the act of teaching. The violation of this law shall be considered a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed $35. About sixty employees have been left out of the House. The budget of the House, according to the bill approved yesterday on third reading, amounted to $120,459.38, and the same will be in effect until June 30, 1949, when the budget for the next fiscal year will take effect. The largest portion of the budget approved yesterday is for the payment of salaries to the representatives. The amount of 329,250 is appropriated for this purpose, to pay the salaries for three months. The bill also provides that the remainder of the "House of Representatives" appropriation, Without Dl "trihuir, For Operating Expenses" in the amount of $328,491.82, contained in Act No. 280. approved on May 15, and the funds set aside for the House of Representatives from the appropriation contained in Act No. 2, approved on April 11, 1948, which have not been expended or purchased, shall be paid into the general funds of the Island Treasury. With the savings proposed in the bill approved yesterday, the Chamber's expenditures for the fiscal year 1948-49 will total $262,395. The bill contains a provision to make the bill effective March 18, 1949. -The House also approved an appropriation of $650,000, to be expended by the Emergency War Program for public works. The amount of $50,000, of the referred appropriation, will be used by the Emergency War Program acting on behalf of the Department of Labor to carry out tasks related to the shipment of Puerto Rican workers to the mainland. According to the information given to the Chamber of Deputies, the Puerto Rico Department of Labor has received urgent demands from Puerto Rican workers. J te" by workers from the Island who need" in the United" States" for different" kinds of work¿3 P. de la C. 480, which penalizes the "illegal" employment of workers in the United" States, was also approved on third reading. 480, which penalizes any person who, being required to do so, refuses to pay any arbltritt" Lúg' 1 persons who violate this law shall be liable to pay, in "Ák J rión, five percent of the "Hrtfcfá dad they owe and interest" í' percent. Ls Cámsrs left pending MB - er discussed on Monday, the legUM cecommended by the TeaorS Puerto Rico destinarte a extor (Cont. on "page 13, C