THE WNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Generally partly cloudy with scattered showers tonight, Saturday and Saturday night. Moderate to fresh easterly winds. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:M this afternoon, 8O.(>(¡ inches of mercury.
NEW YOBK, July n. (PU). - The following temperatures were recorded this afternoon: Chicago, 81; Miami, 88; New York, 88; Washington, 94. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: continued hot, but less humid during the afternoon, - temperature highest over 80; moderate winds from the west and northwest.
DAILY LA MARANA
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 23, 1949
NUMBER 13732
FIVE CENTS
Spellman Vs. Mrs. Roosevelt Cardinal Accuses Former First Lady Of Proceeding In An Anti-Catholic Way
NEW YORK, July 22, (PU)-Cardinal France Spellman today accused former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt of anti-Catholicism "unworthy of an American mother" for opposing the allocation of federal instructional funds to parochial schools. In an acrimonious personal letter, the Church's high prelate, Archbishop of the Diocese of New York, charges that the late President's widow had repeatedly, sponsored anti-Catholic causes, and that, in her newspaper columns, she had "spun and watered the plots of prejudice." At Hyde Park, Mrs. Roosevelt's secretary said that the letter had not been received, and that no reply would be given until it had been carefully studied. Cardinal Spellman counters his bitter attack on Mrs. Roosevelt's "My Daily Life" column for June 23, in which she states that she does not like to see public instruction "connected with religious control of the schools, paid for with taxpayers' money." Through Ignorance or Prejudice Said the Cardinal that those words were written "through misinformation, ignorance or prejudice, and not through knowledge and understanding." Mrs. Roosevelt had written in connection with the pro-
CARDINAL SPELLMAN Jh Or " Wr /Sf A.... MRS. ELEANOR ROOSEVELT
Barden project, now pending before Congress. No legislative action on it is expected before July 29. The bill provides that federal funds "for instruction shall be allocated to the states on the basis of the total number of school-age children, including those attending private and religious schools, as well as public schools. But the money so allocated would go only to public schools. Mrs. Roosevelt had written that parents should send their children to any kind of school they wanted, but that "many years ago it was decided that the public schools of our country should be entirely separated from all denominational control. We Must Pay Support. "If we wish our children to attend schools of any special kind," she wrote, "whether because we wish them to have religious instruction, or for any other reason, we are at liberty to establish those schools and pay for their support." Cardinal Spellman strongly disagreed with that view, and said Mrs. Roosevelt had launched a personal attack on him by saying that he had provoked a "controversy" by advocating that Catholic schools share in federal funds. (Cont. on page 14, Cob 2)
AAC To Strengthen) Local Inspection Staff To Help Airport Government Work. José Trias Monge, Puerto Rico's first assistant attorney general, who was part of the delegation that accompanied Governor Muñoz Marin to the United States, arrived in San Juan early yesterday morning. Mr. Trias, as well as the other companions of the Governor, was ready on Thursday to leave by ship for Puerto Rico, but when Mr. Muñoz Marin changed his plans, and postponed his return due to new arrangements he would have to make in the United States, Mr. Trias boarded a return plane last night. Mr. Trias Monge said that his presence in Puerto Rico was necessary, "because of the enormous amount of work at the Department of Justice. With the Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco, as Acting Governor, his work has doubled, and the Attorney General, José C. Aponte," has been acting as Assistant Attorney General and has also continued with the work of Special Attorney General, having on his shoulders an extraordinary workload". The other members of the Governor's entourage remained "in New York. Some will be leaving for Puerto Rico by plane in the next three days, and others will be accompanying the Governor's entourage" (Cont. on page 14, Col. 7).
The Municipal Committee of the Popular Democratic Party in San Juan, presided by Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, has begun preparations to offer a reception to the president of the party and first Governor elected by Puerto Ricans, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marin, and his wife, Mrs. Inés María Mendoza de Muñoz Marín, "in just recognition of the magnificent work done by both of them during their visit to the United States. The excellent results of their work in benefit of the best interests of Puerto Rico will not be long in coming. This was informed yesterday by Mrs. Rincón de Gautier, when informing the agreements taken by the political organization that she presides. The Popular Municipal Committee met last night under the presidency of the Mayor of San Juan and agreed to "mobilize all our forces in the Capital to receive, as he deserves, our great leader and glutton of the Puerto Rican people, without distinction of political affiliations." As is known, Governor Muñoz Marin and his family planned to arrive in San Juan next Monday, but at the last minute they postponed their departure from New York in order to attend to other official business. "Even though Muñoz Marin is opposed to these demonstrations, (Cont. on page 14, Col. 8)
Treasury Department Believes Home Insurance Should Be Reassessed Could Raise Actual Appraised Value If Law Is Not Amended Further to the information published in yesterday's issue regarding the YÓrW in which the reassessment may affect home insurance, pursuant to Act 27 of 1941, the Acting Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Francisco de Jesús, has issued a press release. The Acting Treasurer said that he explained in the meeting held with the directors of the Mayors Association, and with legislators, "that the appraised value of the properties of persons who today enjoy that exemption (the homestead exemption) will increase if the law is not amended and if those properties are currently appraised for less than their fair and reasonable value". The following is the statement of Acting Treasurer Francisco de Jesus: "I wish to refer to the report that appeared in EL MUNDO on Friday, July 22, regarding the meeting held yesterday with the mayors and legislators in which the new scientific appraisal system was discussed. "Said news appeared published in EL MUNDO under the headline "Retasación Puede Afectar Hogar Seguro - Seria en Casos Valor Incrementara." "In my opinion, both the title and the subtitle of the news item are perfectly in line with the explanation I gave regarding this point. In the spirit only of acla(Cont. on p. 14, Col. 5)
New York Honors Muñoz Marín
I " ~ ■ ■ ■ "ti >, (Mr' flk": V M IK 18 iKi" .'?v 4 üm wJ?yyt i ■ ■ ■ v KnF* -al * H j i -™a ■! |í j jMHF Ka
Jm graphs show aspects of Governor Muftos Marín's visit to the New York City Hall and the picket line set up against him by pro-independence organizations fighting the Governor's attitude towards the political status of the Island, En
The Governor's attitude towards the political status of the Island, in front of the City Hall, where he was presented to officials of the Administration. On the left is Mr. Grover Whalen, chairman of the Township Reception Committee. At right, police maintain order as pickets walk with the photograph at left.
Left photo. picketers carry signs near City Hall Park, where Mr. Muftos Marin was received by the Mayor of New York, Mr. William OTIwyor. At the center, the Governor greets Mayor O'Dwyer (is-
The Governor greets Mayor O'Dwyer (in white suit), accompanied by Whalen (at his side), as he arrives in a car with the top down. The Governor will rest for several days before returning home. (Photos by Associated Press).
Tail Law Jurisdiction Upheld
Supreme Court Upholds Powers Of NLRB Clarifies It Can Intervene With All Employers Except In Two Cases In an important decision just issued by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, it is resolved that by virtue of the provisions of the Ta<t-Hartley Act, the National Labor Relations Board has plenary and exclusive jurisdiction in Puerto Rico over all employers - except in two cases. It is resolved that under the provisions of the Ta<t-Hartley Act, the National Labor Relations Board has plenary and exclusive jurisdiction in Puerto Rico over all employers -- with the exception of government corporations and those engaged in agriculture -- who commit unlawful labor practices covered by federal law: and that consequently the Insular Labor Relations Board lacks jurisdiction to hear such cases, even when a predominantly local business or enterprise is involved. Bayamon Transit Co. v. Insular Labor Relations Board, et al. This case originated in 1946 on account of certain charges filed before the Insular Board by the Guaynabo Chófores Union. In view of these charges, the Board issued a complaint against the Bayamón Transit Co., which culminated, after a long process, in a decision and order dated May 22, 1947, whereby the Bayamón Transit Co. was ordered to enter things (1), among other things (1) to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement with the Guaynabo Drivers Union; (2) to withdraw all recognition from the Bayamón Transit Co. Employees Association; and, (3) to return to the 55c hourly pay system for drivers, instead of the nc-i a percent. Further Proceeding Denied a motion <! * reconsideration filed with said Board by the Bayamón Transit Co., the. company appealed on July 24, 1947, to the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico requesting review of the Board's order, and the suspension thereof. Shortly after the case was appealed to the Supreme Court, the Tafl-Hartley Act became effective on August 22, 1947. "" D SttA p ffW' £ the Taft-Hartley Act, i.e., under the Wagner Act, the Insular Labor Relations Board had jurisdiction over companies such as the Bayamon Transit Co. which are local in character, the Supreme Court says, after citing numerous state court and national Supreme Court decisions: "The National Board has not assumed jurisdiction in this specific case or in this industry generally. And at the same time the Insu ( ar Board issued its order, an agreement between the National and Insular Boards provided for a division of labor, under which the present case falls within the local jurisdiction of the Insular Board. We will therefore assume, without deciding, that while the Wagner Act was in effect, the Insular Board had "jurisdiction to enter the Order we are reviewing." Effect of Entqlenda The Court then goes on to consider the effect of the amendment introduced by the Taft-Hartley Act to section 10(a) of the Wagner Act, and says: "Accordingly, under the unamended section 2(6) v of the new version of section 10(a), in the absence of a cession of jurisdiction, under the TaftHartley Act the National Board has exclusive jurisdiction in Puerto Rl(Cont. at page 14, Co. 3)
Munoz Is Likely To Board Next Week; Will Rest For A Few Days
Motor vehicle drivers who travel on the capital's public roads have reacted against the constant suspensions of the repair work on Muñoz Rivera Avenue. The above conclusion is the result of a survey conducted by EL MUNDO among drivers of public automobiles and taximeters, as well as private drivers of San Juan and the Island, who travel on the aforementioned road. All the people interviewed stated in similar terms, agreeing that Muñoz Rivera Avenue should be repaired by the government as soon as possible, since the conditions of this public road are appalling, and its current state is seriously damaging to motor vehicles. One of the interviewees - a tux.< - driver - said that in his opinion the present state of the Avenue not only affects the condition of the cars, but also represents an additional risk for drivers and passengers, since the holes and slopes of the road, with relative ease can make the driver lose control of the steering wheel. According to Mr. Angel (2) Silva, the repair of Muñoz Rivera Avenue will not begin until a new layer of asphalt has been laid on the road leading from the Báscula Bridge to Campamento, this work has not yet been completed, as he reported, because the machine for heating the asphalt is being repaired. Dlee Hay Dinero"■Other drivers consulted not only expressed their opinion against new postponements and in favor of starting the work as soon as possible, but also expressed the opinion that the raqonataucclórt of this avenue should have been carried out already. One of those who expressed this opinion was Mr. Jaime Ortiz, a cab driver from San Juan, who said: "Today money and the avenue is in a deplorable condition. The delay in its reconstruction and the new construction is inexplicable. Pedro Rivera, of Guayama, believes that the repair is urgent and should not be postponed since the condition of the road is causing damage to Jo" vehicles. Riven adds that first plans were made to rebuild it and it was not possible to do so and now the Planning Board has approved the project to repair it and the work has not begun either, which, he said, "seems like a game of let's start and then we start." The following drivers are of the opinion that the work should be started now, in view of the condition of the road and the problems it causes to automobiles: Plinto (Cont. on page 14, Co. 8).
Justice Opinions Also Need Citizenship To Take Revalidation By Benjamin Santana EL MUNDO Staff Writer Numerous medical surgeons and osteopaths residing in Puerto Rico are affected by a legal opinion issued yesterday by the* Department of Justice, at the request of the Executive Secretary. According to the opinion, issued by Acting Attorney General José C. Aponte, any physician must be a U.S. citizen in order to revalidate or intern in any of the Island's hospitals. It is reported that numerous applications have arrived at La Fortaleza from foreign doctors who, although they are graduates of recognized U.S. universities, will not be able to revalidate here because they do not meet the requirement of U.S. citizenship. | Many foreign physicians are currently practicing in Puerto Rico, under a special law that has granted them a provisional license, subject to certain limitations.
Lawyer Jailed For Contempt Judge Benitez Of Ponce Then Sets Hearing To Hear Ledo. Goyco PONCE, July 22. " - (By Miguel Rivera) - Judge Celestino Benitez, of the Ponce Municipal Court, yesterday issued two sentences for contempt against former attorney Ramon Goyco, and ordered his incarceration. Mr. Goyco was defending a defendant charged with two counts of petty theft. At the end of the people's evidence, the defense attorney asked to be shown the evidence, that is, some bicycle parts that his defendant was alleged to have stolen. The judge declared that the defense's request was denied, and Mr. Goyco stated that he was withdrawing from the case. Then" an exchange of words arose between the judge and the attorney, and when attorney Goyco stated that he claimed that evidence "in any way", the Court understood that it had been disregarded, and sentenced the attorney to pay a fine of $85.00 or to serve one day in jail for each dollar he failed to pay. As the judge spoke ordered the attorney to shut up, the attorney replied that he would not shut up. "You go ahead and put as many sentences as you want," the lawyer said. The court imposed another similar sentence and ordered bailiff Jose Hernandez to take the lawyer to jail. Goyco was detained in the office of the mayor of the district jail. AHI was visited by a commission of lawyers. (Cont. on page 14, Col. 7),
Foreign Doctors Will Not Be Allowed to Intern on the Island
I Eta. M Hr M jetas■Kr /' ' & Z * * '- Acting Solicitor Aponte (ations fljadás by the Legislatula. Such physicians cannot practice public medicine, having to confine their duties to municipal or governmental beneficence, se(Cont. on page 14, Col. 5)
Labra School Strike Settlement Arises Union and Employer Agree to Hold Workers' Election Yesterday afternoon the labor-management controversy in the Labra School expansion work in Santurce was settled by an agreement reached by the workers and the contracting firm to hold workers' elections to determine whether or not the striking union has a majority of the workers. The controversy revolved around the request for recognition made by the Union of Construction Workers, affiliated to the UGT, which the firm Fongora Corporation refused, unless it was in the form and manner established by the labor laws. The Union demanded that the employer voluntarily recognize the Union as the representative of the majority of the workers, for purposes of collective bargaining. This refusal resulted in the strike of the 55 workers employed at the works, and in incidents of violence in which some workers and one of the contractors were wounded by bullets and stones. Through the direct intervention of Acting Governor Géigel Polanco and the conciliatory efforts of Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra Berdecla and Island Conciliator Adolfo Collazo, the controversy was settled by the signing of a stipulation to hold the elections. At a meeting held in Fortaleza between the contractors for the elections and the contractors for the elections.
His Whereabouts In New York Unknown His Friends* Declare Muñoz Feels Exhausted By His Work NEW YORK, July 22. (PU) Governor Luis Muñoz Marín, of Puerto Rico, retired today "to the country" under an atmosphere of secrecy. Miss Maria Bigle. who has acted as the Governor's secretary here, said the Governor postponed his return to the Island "to rest for a few days." Muñoz, she said, is extremely tired after his intense activities in Washington and New York. 1" Miss Bigle is under strict orders to keep the Governor's whereabouts secret, and all day she has been informing those who procure Muftos at the Plazs Hotel, that he is in the "country." She stated that the Governor has not set a definite date for his return to San Juan, but he will probably take the boat "in the middle of next week". * Munoz is expected to take a Bull Line ship for his return trip. The Suzanne is the next ship of the company to leave for New York, being scheduled to sail from pier number 23 in Brooklyn on Thursday, July 28. All other persons in contact with the Governor have pledged themselves to secrecy, making the mystery of his stay possibly one of the best kept secrets since the war ended. The most gregarious of his relations would not even indicate the cardinal point where the Governor might be found. He explained that the Governor wishes to rest completely, which would be impossible if the Press and Puerto Ricans living in New York were to discover his hiding place. Although the desire to rest has been offered as the official reason for the postponement of the Governor's return trip, Dr. José N. Cesteros, Puerto Rican leader of the Democratic Party, said Muñoz has "important business" to attend to that he has not considered due to his commitments in Washington and New York. Cesteros declined to indicate the nature of those issues, nor the people with whom the governor will discuss them. Muñoz was supposed to leave yesterday, Thursday, on the Bull Insular Line's Kathryn. Shortly after departure time, however, he canceled his reservations and began to lay down his smokescreen. Phone calls to the Plaza Hotel were rejected by a carefully instructed operator. Reporters and other visitors to the Hotel learned that the Governor was unavailable. Meanwhile, the Governor and his party were leaving the Hotel and retreating to their hideout. (Cont. on page 14, Col. 4)