THE b®NDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy but cloudy at times during scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 81 degrees; low, 10 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 28.85 inches of mercury.
NEW fORX. dec. 18. (FU) - Ru this afternoon m reported Blgidentee temperatures: New York. 82; Chicago, 88; Wáshlngton, 88; Miami, 78. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: clear with weather less Me, temperature mée high near 45. variable winds. *
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Post Office. San Juan. P. R.
. SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 17, 1949
NUMBER 13878
FIVE CENTS
Legislature To Meet On Tuesday, December 19
To Discuss Coffee Price Increase i , -■ - i? Convocation Includes Arbitrage and Funds for Rehabilitation By Juan Martine* Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO . On Monday, the Legislative Assembly will meet in special session, according to a proclamation issued yesterday by Governor Luis Muñoz Marín. A serious matter will be considered at the session: the coffee industry and the coffee market. The general problem will include the levy of a tax, the proceeds of which will be dedicated to the rehabilitation and development of the coffee industry. Funds will also be allocated to continue the program of the General Supply Administration" According to official information, the Government has had to intervene in the world conflict which has caused the unusual rise in the price of coffee in the New York market. The sale price of coffee is controlled by the Government of Puerto Rico, a control that has favored local harvesters until a few days ago. The rise in the world price has prompted the harvesters and hoarders here to request, clamoring as an act of justice, that they be allowed to sell their product at the world market price or else be allowed to export it to foreign countries where they would obtain that price. Puerto Rico produces only two thirds of the coffee it consumes. Until now, the Government, through the Supply Administration, has been buying abroad the third part that is consumed and not produced. Government spokesmen have stated that if the country were to produce all the coffee it consumes, the Government would not authorize an increase in the price of the product, for the reason that when coffee was cheap on the world market, the consumers of this country had to pay for it at prices above that of the market. . The price, according to these spokesmen, cannot be stabilized at what it is today, because when "1 Government buys the eighty or ninety thousand quintals abroad, it will have to pay for them. at a price higher than the maximum price existing today in the pals. The coffee thus purchased could not be sold on the local market at the price now fixed by the Government, without this resulting in a loss of several million dollars. ! This would be a subsidy of several million dollars for coffee consumers which is not justified, if it is taken into account that other more necessary products on the table in human nutrition do not enjoy this subsidy. It was said that if milk, bread, meat and other essential foods do not obtain government subsidies so that the public can obtain them at cheaper prices, there is no reason for the Government to spend millions of taxpayers' dollars in paying a subsidy for a product such as coffee, which, although it is of general consumption, is not a basic food for human nutrition. The current market conditions, in the opinion of Government spokesmen, make it necessary to allow an increase in the maximum price fixed for coffee, but the profit which (Continued on p. 18, col. 4) -- ■ I ... "- I 1 I I I Agents Seize Ounce of Heroin A Passenger Arrested At Airport Admits Guilt in Case Two / agents of the Narcotics Division of the Beverage Bureau and a, member of the Detective - arrested an Individual upon disembarking on the Island, finding him with one gram of heroin. The Beverage and Narcotics Bureau of the Island's Treasury Department received a tip that Rl,chard Cabassa Esteban had left for New York to look for heroin. The Bureau contacted the air transportation companies operating on the island and was informed of Cabassa Esteban's return, after a continuous surveillance at the Isla Grande airport that lasted several days. Agents William Lebrón Garden and Raúl González Trinidad and Detective José Luciano were stationed at the airport. According to the information provided by Mr. Santos Buxó, head of the Narcotics Division of the Beverage Bureau, on Thursday, between 4:00 and 4:30 P. M., then (Continued on p. 18, col. 8) ' - - i
Rotarian President Arrives
1 k i!® V
Rotary International President Percy Hodgson (left), his wife, and Rotary International Secretary Juan Roger arrive in Puerto Rico yesterday. The Puerto Rican Rotarians are preparing to entertain the distinguished visitors.
Goodwill Tour Throughout the World
Hundreds of Rolrfrioa and their wives give him a warm welcome. Accompanied by Mrs. Wife
By Benjamin SANTANA . Editor of EL MUNDO
Hundreds of Rotarians from all over the world yesterday welcomed Dr. Percy Hodgson, president of Rotary International. He arrived in San Juan on a trip of goodwill, accompanied by
-K ■■■ - ni ■ his ■■■ i ■■■,"■ 510 Persons Are to Take Free Examination - Instruction Jo. Offers High School Diplomas By Benjamín SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer About 510 people have been accepted by the Department of Instruction to take the first free exams to be given in Puerto Rico in accordance with Law 710 of May 4. The exams will be offered in San Juan and Ponce, during the 27th, 28th and 29th of this month, as informed yesterday by Commissioner Mariano Vlllaronga. Those who manage to pass these exams, whose selections have the same degree of difficulty as those included in the study of high school subjects, will receive a fourth-year diploma as valid as any other. The Department of Instruction has had to reject, however, about a thousand applications for not being duly completed, as reported yesterday. The registration was closed last November 30. The 510 accepted represent 66 municipalities of the Island. D s manda Superior "The demand has been superior to everything we expected", said yesterday the commissioner Vlllaronga, warning, however, that only '00 of the 1,500 applicants have fulfilled the necessary requirements. These requirements are: to be not less than 25 years of age; to have tasted outside the classroom for at least the last five years; and to meet the same moral conditions required for the dlfñoma in the regular course. Due to the extraordinary interest shown in taking the exams, Commissioner Vlllaronga extended to three* days the period for taking the six tests prepared by the Extension Bureau? Many requested that the exams be offered in different municipalities of the island; but it has not been possible to make the necessary arrangements. \ Vlllaronga explained that "the "hatuvaléza of these examinations advises that, for the time being, the examination centers be limited to two- San Juan and Ponce 4 '. He then added: "We hope that the unique opportunity offered to all citizens of Puerto Rico will reward, in part, the sacrifices that the Interested Parties will have to make to obtain their diploma," which will be equivalent, for all academic and legal purposes, to a high school diploma," he said. - Those who are unable to examine" eats month, may do so next June, Subjects Covered , The examinations will comprise six tests in English, Spanish, mathematics, study" soclalei and natural science, / Those in English and Spanish will include v ejerciclea of Interpretation in reading, forms of language, composition, . vocabulary and writing of (Continued on p. 16. col. 7) 1
-The visitors arrived yesterday at 2:00 p.m. at the Jala-Grande airport in one of the Pan American World Airways planes. They were immediately transferred to Jack's Club where they were treated to lunch. For 1a ñocha ae offered a formal banquet at the hotel Caribe HlWon, during a party that many have described as the largest civic-social net *n 1a history of the Inaular Rotaramo. They were met at the airport by "1 Lic. Antonio Texldor. district governor: Mr. Harwood Hull, Jr., president of the San Juan Club; several past governors; and numerous Rotarians and Rotarianas. Lunch with MacArthur During Dr. Hodgson's long tour of European and Far Eastern countries since last August, he recently lunched with General Douglas MacArthur in Japan. Puerto Rico is the forty-third country that the president of Rotary International has visited on this goodwill tour of all the nations of the world. Arriving yesterday in San Juan said he felt "a deep and slnr.era satisfaction to step on land borlcus and embrace so many good and loyal friends," He has just returned from Europe, after visiting the Rotary clubs of all their countries holding conferences and preaching the ideals d" the organization that preside, in a generous effort to further strengthen relations of peace and friendship among peoples. The same work was also done in the countries of the Far East and in those of the South American continent already visited by him during the last few weeks. Yesterday Dr. Hodgson intended to visit the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, and the new Casino recently inaugurated in La Capita}. Today he will leave for the Dominican Republic to return next Monday, when he will be entertained by the Caparra Country Club, in the evening, with a buffet-supper. In addition to being an enthusiastic Rota(Continued on page 16, col, 5)
Judge Suarez Garriga Ordered Released Last Night i ' J ■ - . - To Trader Miguel Palón
XXT The Moscow Conference The Conference of Foreign Ministers which held its first session in Moscow on March 10, 1947 is remembered for its failures rather than its achievements. In my opinion this conference was a victorious failure. Despite all the fruits it produced, this meeting of Foreign Ministers resulted in the Soviet attitude towards Germany and Austria being clarified beyond any possibility of confusion. This in turn resulted in the unification of the policy of France, Great Britain and the United States to a degree which otherwise would never have been achieved. We judged that our experience in Austria was more than sufficient to indicate how to neutralize the effectiveness of any strongly centralized government. We hoped that the Soviet Union would now try to achieve an equally centralized government for Austria.
O'Dwyer Marries O'Dwyer Mayor William Marries on Tuesday
FOM LAUDERDALE, Florid., Dec. 16, (PU)- New York Mayor William O'Dwyer announced today that he will follow the lead of Vice President Barkley and marry model Sloan Simpson next Tuesday morning. They will be married in Stuart, Florida. The announcement was made by the Mayor's office in New York and confirmed here. Mayor in New York and confirmed here by friends of the couple. - Miss Simpson boarded O'Dwyer's borrowed yacht, Almar II, here this morning and immediately took off for "a fishing trip." It is not known whether O'Dwyer was going to bor. It is not known whether O'Dwyer was going to sail or not. Reports from the Fort Lauderdale waterfront dlpjeron that O'Dwyer was indeed on board. His office on 'New York denied these reports and said that the Mayor did not see her on board.
said that the Mayor would not see his future wife until the day of k bo. Toasted by* the sun and wearing tan pants and blue jacket, O'Dwyer drove Miss . Simpson to the office of the county judge, Arthur R. Clonts, in demand of a ma. trimonlo license. They will be married Tuesday at St. Joseph's Catholic church. Father Timothy Geary, natura! of the same county of O'Dwyer, May, Ireland, will officiate. Under the five-day Fio* rlda law, Tuesday morning will be the nearest time that Mayor O'Dwyer and Miss Simpson can be married. Although the application was made yesterday, Clonts waited until today to file hr application at O'Dwyer's request. (Continued on p. 18, col. 3)
New York Saved 25% of Water Yesterday Successful First No-Toilet Friday Measures In City History By JaekVFOX NEW YORK, Dec. 16 ip, U.1- New York's millions of hshlten'es saved about 25 percent of their average home water consumption today in the first "No-Toilet Friday" in the city's history. The beards were sprouting, the hemp was dry, the dishes were piling up in the sinks and the clothes lines were empty as the vast majority of the city's 8,000,000 residents gleefully celebrated the "water holiday" caused by the sad fact that the precious liquid is in short supply in the metropolis. Official figures on how much the city saved on this "dry Friday" will not be announced until tomorrow, but a study of the average flow rate of one of the city's largest aqueducts showed that it was consuming - at noon - less than 75 percent of the amount of water it consumed last Friday. From .Street to the United Nations, from the Bowery to Park Avenue, beards were finding the day. The commuters on the trains, arriving in the city from suburban towns, were mostly clean-shaven, but on the municipal subways the men exchanged glances and found beards everywhere. The United Press telephoned 185 residences and found that 83.2 percent of the families called were neither bathing nor shaving - 140 households said they were cooperating, and 25 admitted that someone in the family was either shaving or bathing. M" ost of the" men who ■e shaved used electric shavers, and most of the men who bathed were Infante", who couldn't help it. Elevator man Bill Jackson rre(Continued on p. 16. col, 3).
My Three Years in Moscow
Results in a Resounding Failure Ministers' Meeting in Russia
We thought that the Kremlin's goal was to neutralize their effectiveness through Jos mitrnos methods. We thought that the Kremlin's aim would be to restrict the reabllitaclón of the western zones and prevent the development of "federalism". We also saw that the Russians were demanding all the privileges of the Anglo-American concept of democracy and were going to foster their legal and secret organizations in the Western zones, while at the same time continuing to deny these privileges" to the inhabitants of the zone by the Soviet. It was obvious that the issue of reparations would figure as one of the most important topics" of the discussions. If the Soviet Union succeeded in getting a high figure approved in determining reparations, it would immediately solve a major economic problem at home and at the same time slow down the growth and economic reconstruction of the western parts of Germany. This same double senile(Continued on page 10, Col. 3)
The same double senile (Continued on page 10, Col. 3) were approved by the Department of the Interior and the Department of Health, as reported yesterday by Commissioner Jorge Jimenez. This first part, which is expected to begin next year, will be carried out at a cost of $6,258,600, including land, movable equipment, supervision and inspection, architects' fees and other expenses. First Construction This first part of the project comprises the construction of a 400-bed General Hospital: residence and nurses' school for 200 students; swimming pool and gymnasium; staff residences, service units, workshops, sales, power house and storage; cafeteria. The preliminary plans for this stage were submitted by architect Isadora Rosenfeld, who was on the Island to discuss them during the 12th, 13th and 14th of this month, having been approved by the Departments of Health and the Interior with several recommendations, according to Mr. Jorge Jimenez yesterday. Total Project x The project will be carried out in three stages. The first, explained above, at an approximate cost of $6,258,600; the second at a cost of $3,382,800 and the third and last at a cost of $6,644,500 for a total cost of $16,285,900. The second stage consists of the construction of a 500-branch hospital with its buildings and other ancillary structures. The last stage consists of the construction of a men's hospital. (Continued on p. 16. col. 4>
.... t w w K I This photograph was taken shortly before the recent New York elections when Mayor O'Dwyer was attending a city theater in the company of his fiancée, Miss Sloan Simpoon. (Photo by P. A.)
f - .<- ÁA \ lW■k, . W --* i. m■ i a Sr*/ - - '' i * s vi ' 'A iMI Ww.
Miguel Angel Palón, owner of the knitting store" dq,nde the fire that claimed the lives of eight people, was released last night on a habea" corpu" recourse. (Photo from EL MUNDO).
Plans of the Hospital to be built in Ponce are approved.
The first 400 ornas will be endowed in 1950. Ontro Pata Enfermé" of the SI6,285,000 Global Plan.
For R GALVEZ MATURNA Editor of EL MUNDO
The plans for the first stage of construction of the group of hospl. such to be built in the city of Ponce, at a cost of 816,285,900,
■ ■ - - - ■ I. , , > Prío Says Cuba Is Prepared for Defense I - * IVrnídenle Responds to Trujillo's Complaint. - 'The Army Hails Him THE HARANATcubaTdiclembr." 16 <PU)- President Cario" Prlo Socarré", said today (yesterday) that any threat against Cuba's sovereignty will be rejected by a united nation. "Cubans" will die before they lose the rights they have won so hard n before "er humiliated," Prlo said in his first conversation with reference to uña war against Cuba and Guatemala by et Dominican President Rnfael Trujillo. Prío told thousands of traps" who cheered him while" he delivered a speech in commemoration of Soldiers' Day, that the country, as one, was nr "parardo to" maintain jius principle" and make them respect Only Verbal Stage However, he added that the na(Continued on 1* page 16. oob 7) Santa Claus Arrives Tomorrow by Plane He Will Distribute Gifts and Sweets to Children. The Transportation Authority will celebrate the Christmas holidays at the Isla Grande Airport, having prepared a varied program for the days between the 18th and 25th of this month. Tomorrow, Sunday, the 18th, the legendary Santa Claus will arrive at Isla Grande in a plane and will hand out candy to the children on his arrival. From 8 to 10 p.m., there will be a retreta by the band of the "Escuelas Libre" de Música. ' . Toy Raffle On Monday, the 19th, Santa Claus will continue to hand out tickets for the toy raffle, and from 7 to 9 p.m. there will be a showing of his own films for the children. Every day there will be music ek the airport until .25, 1 and as a special attraction on the 23rd from 8 to 10 o'clock noehe University Choir will perform. A group of employees of the Au(Continued on p. 16, col. 8)
C. Andres Ribas Filed Petition Warns Detention Will Appear to Prosecutor (atando Sea Necesario By Jose M. Garcia Calderon Editor of EL MUNDO Judge Julio Suarez Garriga. of the San Juan District Trauns! issued " 6 o'clock yesterday afternoon a writ of habeas corpus ordering the prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez and Captain Jose D. Rios de ). Poli, cia. set free, at 12 o'clock last night Miguel Angel Palou. owner of the commercial establishment Installed in the sinister building in San Juan, in the early hours of last Thursday in e! in which perished, victims of the flames, eight people, and another was seriously injured. Palou had been detained at the San Juan police headquarters since 6:00 a.m. on Thursday morning, completely incommunicado, on orders of the prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez, the officer in charge of the investigation of the accident. Miguel Angel Palou's habeas corpu" petition was filed at the Criminal Clerk's Office of the San Juan District Court, around noon yesterday, by attorney Cesar Andréu Ribas. Allegations It is alleged in the petition that Palou was arrested on the morning of December 15 and taken to the barracks to be interrogated by prosecutors about the fire that destroyed the fabric warehouse he owned. He further alleges that since the time of his arrest he has been kept incommunicado, without receiving food and unable to communicate with his relatives: that in addition to being deprived of communication with his relatives, he has not been allowed to see the drowned man, Mr. Andréu Riba. He also alleged that his arrest was illegal, because there was no probable cause against him connecting him as agent, accomplice or perpetrator in any degree with the kidnapping; and that after he had testified, either as a defendant or as a witness, he was entitled to bail. Palou also argued that under the habeas corpus statute and the provisions of the United States Charter and Constitution, he was entitled to immediate release if there was no probable cause against him and, if probable cause existed, to have bail set for him. When dictating "l auto de hábea" corpus. rl judge Suárez Garrís" I declared that the fiscale" had the right to maintain detained " One or more witnesses pa.-e investigate for reasonable time, and gave 6 hours more, n sea from the 6 of 1" afternoon until the" 12 of the night of yesterday, so that they continued interrogating Palou, having to -terminate his incommunicado detention to said hour. The judge warned that Palou is obliged to appear before the prosecutors as many times as necessary. Palou arrived at the District Court at 3 o'clock in the afternoon, heavily guarded by the Detective, in anticipation of being assaulted. Incidents The hearing d* the habeas corpus petition provoked numerous inciden* te" between the" flécales Raldomero Fr-yre and Angel Viera Martínez, and the lawyer Zíndléu Ribas. Prosecutor Viera Martínez requested the suspension of the hearing, alleging that because he had been notified very late of the filing of the appeal and because both he and Freyre had been busy, it would not be possible for him to answer the allegations made. Viera Martínez explained that "the investigation of this accident in which 8 people died and another was seriously injured is very serious" and that he was at the beginning of the investigation to determine what caused the accident. (Continued on page 14 Col. 1) k W' Rubén Gómez, pitcher of Santurce, is listed as a witness. - * a
Agriculture Inspects Food
Mr. Victor E. Levene, a market specialist from Washington, has arrived in Puerto Rico to take charge of the office which the Division of Standards and Inspection of Manufactured Products of the United States Department of Agriculture has just opened on the island. This service, which has already begun, was established through the efforts of Commissioner Colón Torres, by means of an agreement between his Department and the federal Department of Agriculture. Erie supplies for the time being the personnel and laboratory equipment, and the former offers the premises and all other facilities for the implementation of the system. * It will be recalled that following a visit of the Commissioner to Washington, and as a result of his efforts there, Mr. Nathan Koenlng, Assistant Secretary of Agriculture of the United States, and Mr. F. L. Southerland, Chief of the Division of Standards and Inspection of the Department, came to the island in succession. They reviewed the situation on the ground and verified the need to initiate service before making a final determination on the matter. This now culminates in the dispatch of Mr. Lavene. and the opening of his office in the pal", according to Polon Torres. . He reports that "all food products produced in Puerto Rico or sold in our market will be subjected to the corresponding microscopic analysis. This examination will be made by the office, motu proprio or at the request of the interested party. The object is to classify the product by grade, as to its purity and legitimacy. "The accepted grades are A, R and C, corresponding respectively to the designations "fancy'', "cholea'' and "standard", in descending order of quality. Quality is determined by the character, color and defects of the product, and in the case of llouidos, also by density. To pass the test satisfactorily, the product must be free of mold, insects and other impurities from the soil or imperfections in the processing machinery. Mr. Levene adds that "his office, as a result of the test, will give Certificates" (continued on page 16, ch. 5).