EL NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Medium cloudy, with some scattered light showers in the vicinity. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 82 degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 80.04 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, July 8. (PU). - The following temperatures were reported to you this afternoon: Chicago, 82; MMmi, 88; New York, 78; Wáahington, 8L Predleolonea par" m "íí "n" in New York and neighboring cities: fair weather, little change in 1" temperature, highest temperature, 80 degrees.
MARANA DAILY
1Ñ0 XXX
Entered as second class matter, - Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -SATURDAY JULY 9, 1949
NUMBER 13718
FIVE CENTS
House Bill Has Already Been Forwarded to the President r ."
Congress Approved In Session Yesterday Authorizes 810,000 Unit Program And Controls Slums By LEE NICHOLS WASHINGTON, July 8, (PU)-President Truman scored his first major victory in the Octogéslmoprimer Congreao today, when both Houses finally affixed their" stamps of approval to a conciliatory homestead measure. The measure, which will be signed into law by the President without delay, will initiate the most ambitious slum eradication, rural home improvement and low-income housing program in the Nation's history. Federal housing agency officials have been working hard to get the program moving. They predict that construction of a "substantial number" of public housing units will begin within the next twelve months, and that eradication of slum dwellings will begin within a year. The measure authorizes 810,000 units of public housing over the next six years, a five-year slum eradication program, which will have an allocation of $81,500,000,000, and a $325,000,000 rural home improvement program. He reoulere an expanded program of Federal research to develop better and cheaper housing methods, and plovee for a temporary continuation of the Government's mortgage guarantee program. Mr. Truman made housing for low-income families one of the major promises of his election campaign. The Democrats, with some Republican endorsement, failed to pass similar legislation in the Seventh and Eightieth Congresses. Voice Vote Foes of the measure in the House, who were within five votes to defeat the public housing provision, surrendered today, and the measure passed by voice vote an hour after the session was opened, * Three-quarters of an hour later, the Senate, also by voice vote, completed congre■lonal action on the measure, sending it to the White House. The measure is nearly identical to the bipartisan version originally passed by the Senate, which called for 810,000 units of public housing over the next six years. It also includes the Senate's $325,000,000 figure for rural home improvement. I Public Housing Under the public housing section, the federal government is authorized to spend up to $308,000,000 annually over the next 40 years to pay the difference between the operating expenses of low-income housing and the rental income from such housing. In fact, housing agency officials expect to spend $230,000,000 annually for. 33 years. The money serves only to handle the low rents until local housing authorities pay off their construction loans and can meet operating expenses slnr experiencing losses. The Federal Government will also lend up to $1,500,000,000,000 to finance the construction of public housing units, but this must be repaid by the local communities. The slum eradication provision allows the Government to lend up to $1,500,000,000 to finance the cost of purchasing and destroying property in the slums. This sum must be repaid to the Treasury. Another $500,000,000, however, may be given to communities to compensate them for two-thirds of all losses they incur in reselling the slum areas. The Rural Households Program has $8,850,000,000 for loans to farmers whose farms are, or can be within five years, economically self-supporting. Another $850,000,000,000 may be granted to help pay interest and principal payments for farmers who receive homestead loans but need five years to become financially self-supporting. Assistance to Farmers Another $25,000,000,000 has been provided for combination loans and grants to farmers who demonstrate the prospect of making their farms self-sufficient. These loans will be used to make minor repairs and build sanitary facilities so that they will not have to live on the land (Cont. on page 14, CoL 1).
80-year-old Juagan B * - W$ 1 B H ' ZOILO MORALES CAMACHO, Charged With Violating Law Against Bolita Case Witness Caused Hilarity When He Claimed to Know "John Doe" By José M. Garda Calderon EL MUNDO Staff Writer Zoilo Morales Camacho, an elderly man who claimed to be more than 80 years old, will have to appear next Monday at 2 p.m. before San Juan District Court Judge Angel Umplerre to hear the court's ruling in a case against him yesterday for a violation of the Bolita Law. According to the evidence offered by prosecutor Martin Almodovar, Morales Camacho, who resides in Norzagaray Street in San Juan with his elderly wife, was seized by the detective through a raid, material used for the game of bolita. The material consisted of several lists with numbers written on them. The defendant's attorney, Francisco Garcia Quiñones, unsuccessfully raised a question of law, alleging that the procedure followed for the search vitiated the warrant. After the defense and the prosecutor argued the issue, Judge Umplerre dismissed it. The defendant denied that the detective agents took any bolita material in his house, and stated that he lived selling lottery tickets and serving meals in his house to ladies who work in different commercial establishments in San Juan. The search warrant, by virtue of which Morales Camacho's house was raided, was directed against John Doe (alias Mamey). Jocular Incident A young girl who testified on behalf of the accused caused hilarity in the courtroom when she told the court that John Doe was an Amerindian, who had been residing for a short time in the same building where the accused lives. John Doe's fictitious name was put on the search warrant because the detective knew the defendant by the nickname "Mamey," but did not know his real name. In the building where Morales lives, Camacho has no American residence and the witness' statement made the court officials and the public laugh. The mistake of the witness pa(Cont. on p. 14, Col. 8)
B > ■ ;
There's Displeasure In Canaveral Surely 5%
Allegedly Employers Misinterpret Descartes and Sierra Give Guideline to Follow. Ramos Raises Labor Protest The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, and the Commissioner of Labor, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdecia, held a press conference at the Treasurer's office to make joint public statements on certain interpretations of the laws creating the Employment Security Fund. The aforementioned officers allege that certain sugar employers have misinterpreted the term "permanent position" as used in Laws Nos. 355 and 356 of May 15, 1948, which create the Employment Security System, and in Regulation No. 1 of January 18, 1949, to implement both laws. The officers expressed that the erroneous interpretation of the aforementioned term makes a mockery of the law and harms the workers, since the fundamental objective of the same rests on the creation of the system and on the support of the Employment Security Fund. Law No. 355 We publish below the statements of Messrs. Descartes and Sierra Berdecia: "Law No. 355 of May 15, 1948, as subsequently amended, provides in its Article 2, that every employer in the sugar industry who during the calendar year of 1948 has produced or in any subsequent calendar year produces for milling... 15 or more tons of sugar; and in any subsequent calendar year produces for milling... 15 or more tons of sugar...", 15 or more tons of sugar; and every employer in the sugar industry who processes or refines sugar, shall pay a contribution to the Employment Security Fund, equivalent to 5 percent of the amount paid by such employer to his workers for services rendered in the sugar industry, on or after December 31, 1948. "Article 8 of the same Law No. 355 defines what is meant by the word "obren?", as any person who exercises, । performs or performs work for', va tronos of the sugar industry; providing. further, that excluded from the scope of this definition are executive, administrative, clerical, sup'ervlslón employees (excluding foremen), those who perform permanent positions, etc. Permanent position "The Law does not define what is meant by "permanent position", but, nevertheless, the exemption it makes when mentioning "those holding permanent positions", refers to all those employees who, not being executive, administrative, clerical or supervisory, occupy "permanent positions" in the organization. Pursuant to Section 7 of the Act, which provides that the Treasurer of Puerto Rico shall issue such regulations as he deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this Act. The Treasurer promulgated Regulation No. 1, which in its Article 1, defines the term "permanent position" as follows: "'Permanent positions' are those stable - and continuous in the sugar industry, whose occupants derive during the year, either 12 monthly salaries or 52 weekly salaries." "Some sugar employers allege that they are not obligated to pay the 5 percent tax imposed by Law No. 355, as subsequently amended, for those workers who at the end of the harvest period continue working for the industry in occupations other than those they perform during the harvest period. The industry's claim is (Continued on page Col. 7)
Muñoz Believes Island Will Be Industrialized In Next 25 Years
Pipo Maldonado Injured A i He® MmhÉ-jííí "i ¿ 1B PIPO MALDONADO Suffers Injuries When He Was Run Over By A Taximeter While Trying To Cross Ponce de León Avenue Yesterday, Vehicle Reaching Him The well-known Ponce sportsman, Mr. Felipe R. Maldonado, better known as Pipo, was run over by a cab at 2:25 yesterday afternoon, in front of the building occupied by the Public Parks and Recreation Commission, on Ponce de Leon Avenue, in Puerta de Tierra. Mr. Maldonado was injured in the forehead and was immediately taken to the Santurce Municipal Hospital, where an x-ray was taken and he remained in the hospital. Mr. Fernando Torres Collac, witness of the accident, declared to EL MUNDO that Mr. Maldonado was at the Parks and Recreation Commission, on sports matters: that he left the Commission's offices and tried to cross Ponce de Leon Avenue towards Muñoz Rivera Park, where his son was. Torres Collac says that when Mr. Maldonado reached the center of the road, he avoided a vehicle that was going towards Santurce, but was hit by a taximeter that was trying to pass the first vehicle. * Suffers Injuries Torres Collac added that Maídonado was lifted by the impact about six feet off the road, falling a short distance, receiving a wound on his forehead, a strong blow to one hip, and other injuries. He said that immediately afterwards, he helped mount the injured man in the taximeter, transporting him to the Municipal Hospital where he received medical assistance. The police officer Jose Moya, on duty at the Salvador Brau Street barracks, conducted the investigation of the case, leading the driver Baltasar Malave Santiago, and the witnesses Fernando Torres Collac and William Ortiz, Luna, before Judge Rolando Martinez Ramirez, of the Fourth Chamber of the Municipal Court of San Juan, to whom the dipper was submitted. From the testimony of the witnesses, according to the Court, it is clear that the driver Malave Santiago did not incur in any criminal negligence, which is why no complaint was sworn in the case. The vehicle that ran over Pipo Maldonado is a new car, with X4-8 license plates, owned by Star Taxi Cabs, owned by Alberto Lefranc. It is insured with Anglo-American Insurance Company, according to Police Information. Satisfactory Condition " Last night we contacted the Santurce Municipal Hospital, where it was reported that Mr. Maldonado's condition is satisfactory. The patient stated to the nurse, Miss Ayala, that he was feeling a little dizzy. The result of the x-ray taken upon admission to determine if there was any fracture due to the blow to the head was not known at that time, according to Miss Ayala.
By LUCIEN CARR NEW YORK, July 8. (PU) í The jury in the Alger, Hiss perjury trial reported today , that it was unable to reach a verdict, but Federal Judge Samuel H. Kaufman sent it back to deliberate. "Let me know when they can render a verdict," - Kaufman said. - "Whether it's ten minutes, an hour or three hours - we're " your disposal." Hiss, a former State Department official, is charged with perjury for denying before a Grand Jury having given secret documents to Whlttaker Chambers for a Communist spy ring, or having seen his principal, accuser since January 1 ', 1937. If found guilty, Hls* could be sentenced to five years in prison and a $2,000 fine on each of the two perjury charges. UPR To Graduate 500 During Summer Session Most Are Regular Students. Others Study Humanities, Sciences Six hundred undergraduate students applied to be considered for graduation during this summer session. According to estimates, of those 600, only 500 will graduate by the end of this month, when the UPR summer session ends. Most of the applicants are students from the Normal courses, as well as students from the Colleges of Humanities and Sciences. The students who will graduate are those who were not able to do so during the last semester because they did not have the credits for their studies completed. The summer course consists of 34 days of lectures, having begun on June 6, and is nearing completion. The final examinations will be held on July 22 and 23, Inclusives. Reading Exam The Acting Director of the French Department, Mr. Miguel Angel Santana, informed yesterday that the reading exam, which is required for students of Sciences and Humanities, will take place on Tuesday, July 19, at 4:30 p.m., in rooms 103 and 104 of the Military Department of the UPR. Mr. Santana said that all those students who aspire to graduate this summer, and who need this requirement, should apply on time at the French Department Office, Room 302 of the Pedrelra Building. Advanced Studies It was also informed that those interested in pursuing advanced studies in universities on the continent should contact Professor Miguel A. Santana, Pedrelra 306, before July 14. Personal consultations will be attended to during the afternoons, Monday - Friday. (See page 14, Col. 5)
> y®BBr WWW 1 WINGLESS CHICKENS. - IF you are one of those people who look carefully at the platter of fried chicken lest you catch a wing, then Peter H. Baumann, of Dm Moines, lows, has news that may interest you. Baumann has developed a wingless chicken species after twelve years of effort on his farm and claims that he gets 95 out of every 100 chicks brought to the hatchery in the basement of his home. In the photograph on the left we see him demonstrating between one of his chickens and a normal bird, the latter (on the left) with its complete "aviation equipment". The farmer assures that his chickens have a larger breast and stronger legs, and he seems not to be mistaken when comparing the two birds in the photograph. On the right, part of a group of four hundred such chicks raised by Baumann (photos by Associated Press).
rus polas dos criados
Jury Fails to Reach Verdict in Hiss Perjury Case
Judge Remanded for Deliberation, in New Effort to Reach Final Agreement on Defendant
Status of Trial IF the jury is discharged, the Government will retry the case, and Hiss, the 44-year-old former State Department prodigy, will again have to suffer the "long nightmare" of a trial. Kaufman later told reporters that in the event there is no verdict, the trial will not be dismissed, but will be deemed not to have been. "IF I am informed that you cannot reach a verdict," Kaufman said after asking* the Jury to make a further attempt to reach a decision, "'I will disband the Jury." The Jury advised at 3:15 p.m., after three hours and sixteen minutes of deliberations. that it could not agree. Kaufman called the jurors to the ' Cont. room at náglna 14. Col. 3) VA To Pay $ 8,0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 To Washington Veterans To Send Sum In Dividends For Life Insurance. By Rurico E. Rivera EL MUNDO Staff Writer More than $8,000,000 in veteran's life insurance dividends - known as "Life Insurance" by National Service - will be distributed among some 65,000 Puerto Rican veterans of World War II, the Veterans Administration announced yesterday. Dr. Jaime Serra Chavarry, director of the agency, revealed yesterday that the federal agency will soon announce how the Life Insurance dividend will be distributed to veterans of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. "When the application blanks are available, they will be distributed through post offices and veterans' organizations in every town on the island. Distribution of the dividend," he said, "will be made by our Central Office in Washington, directly to eligible veterans." Gray Active Z E1 Veterans Affairs Administrator Carl R. Gray Jr. said recently that he is setting up one of the world's largest machine accounting systems to help compute $2,800,000,000 in insurance dividends for some 16 million World War II veterans. Mr. Gray Jr. also said that virtually every veteran will receive some payment. He said each veteran's share of the total refund will be determined based on the size of the insurance he or she had, the number of monthly premiums paid and how other factors affect him or her. Beneficiaries Affected On the other hand, Dr. Serra Chavarry, of the Puerto Rico Veterans Office, stated that in those cases in which the veteran is deceased, the legal beneficiaries of the policy will receive the dividend that resulted from the veteran's policy. "It is still impossible, he said, to disclose the amount that each veteran will receive in dividends. Calculations to determine this figure are currently in progress (Cont. on page 14, Col. 3).
Doesn't Believe Independence Will Increase Krug, Governor Explain New Statehood By JAMES F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, July 8 (PU)- Governor Luis Muñoz Marín said today that Puerto Rico will be "a highly industrialized community in twenty-five years" or it will be in the midst of "chaos. "But," he added, "I am confident that it will be industrialized." Muñoz made the statement during the course of a conference lasting more than an hour with newspaper correspondents from the Mainland and Puerto Rico. Secretary of the Interior Julius A. Krug introduced Muflos as a political leader whose "Administration has kept the faith of Congress and the President. Muñoz, he said, has justified the trust placed in the people of Puerto Rico by granting them a government of their own. Krug left the room after introducing Muñoz. "This is the Governor's press conference, not mine," he said. Answering questions, Muñoz said he does not anticipate a growth of the Independence movement in* Puerto Rico. "The Puerto Ricans are an intelligent people," he said, "they know they have real freedom in their daily lives as things stand now. "* In introducing Muñoz, Krug repeated what Muñoz told President Truman on Tuesday that Puerto Rico is "a new kind of state. This new state, Krug agreed, "is not defined by law," but it exists and is taking shape. The new state, Krug said, represents "a new concept" in American government - one in which a part of the United States can enjoy "maximum autonomy" along with "the advantages of the present" without actually being a state. Muñoz said he knows that this "new kind of state" exists "from the observation of facts, rather than from the reading of documents". The new development in the new kind of status, Muñoz said, is for Puerto Ricans to "write their own Constitution." "I don't think there will be any difficulty," Muñoz said, "in obtaining this fuller autonomy." Muñoz reported that Puerto Ricans' better feeling toward the United States since they began "to govern their own affairs" is very evident. He implied that they would be even happier and feel more attached to the Continent if they could write their own Constitution. When asked if he thinks he will live to see the moment when Puerto Rico achieves economic self-sufficiency, he dodged a direct answer. He said he does not know how long he will live, but indicated that he hopes to see that day come. The 12-year tax moratorium on new industries setting up on the island has become a controversial issue on the mainland - mainly in industrialized New England. Asked about the tax moratorium by a New England journalist, Muñoz said that early in his administration he set a policy of not granting tax exemptions to any company "that is going to close a factory in one state in order to open one in Puerto Rico. Arrabales Muñoz said he does not believe in "trying to rob one part of the U.S. economy to help others." The Governor said he is confident that the new program fede. (Cont. on p. 14, Col. 1)
Evening Standard Predicts Insular Dominion Status
WASHINGTON, July 8. (PU)-The Evening Standard editorially predicted that a dominion status and a separate Constitution for Fuer to Rico would have "profound" hemispheric repercussions. "That status," the paper said, "would symbolize what forward-looking Puerto Ricans understand to be its special role-that of an ideological, cultural and practical link between the United States and our neighbors to the South." The editorial jumped under theHItu'o "Puerto Rican Visitor." The r> tatlvo welcomed Luis Mvftoz Marín as a man who "is remarkably equal in his office, in his personality and in his ideas." - m "His ascent to the governorship in the last leñero, said the editorial, "marked the climax of a po-
The editorial said: "His ascension to the governorship in the last lumber, the editorial said, "marked the climax of a political evolution that spanned almost half a century, and which has transformed Puerto Rico from a backward Spanish colony into a forward-looking entity, closely and harmoniously associated with the United States." Relations With the Island The editorial said, "Our relations with Puerto Rico constitute a proud record of liberal policy. We have never attempted to 'assimilate' its people, in the sense of imposing our culture and language on theirs, while, in integrating the Island into our economic system and in instituting an educational pattern familiar to the new generation with our ideas, ideals and methods, Puerto Ricans were left with books to develop their own identities (Cont. on page 14, CoL 2).
Drivers To Convene Assembly
Police Intervened Yesterday With Guagüitas Going From the Island to the Capital For J. M. UFRET Editor of EL MUNDO. Yesterday morning reports were received again at the Public Service Commission that some Rio Piedras police officers continued to detain drivers of "pisicorre" guagüitas coming to San Juan with passengers coming from neighboring towns. The Chief of the Commission's Transit Division telephoned the Commander of that police post and asked him to give instructions to all the agents under his command to allow those drivers to reach San Juan, as long as they were not caught, Rubén Gaztamblde Arrillaga, representative to the Chamber of Deputies for the Rlo-Pledras-Caro-Lina-Trujlllo Alto District, visited the Commission to raise this and other problems related to the transportation of passengers on the routes of his district. Two of the spokesmen for the group which on Thursday morning urged the drivers to protest against the measures adopted by the Commission, said yesterday that they have not given up their intentions. They intend to request the facilities of a meeting hall to hold an assembly to select a committee to carry forward their demands. One of them stated that the drivers hold Mr. Salvador T. Caro responsible for the situation created, because they consider that the measures adopted by the Commission were taken at his request. . r Several drivers who have obtained authorization to operate their guagüttas, said that if they get the backing of the majority of the perindicados they will P r °P° ner la cahbracllW*Wé uña "taWMtatataclón o" Já que vayan sus esposas y sus hijos, "para que Caro vea cuán cuántas bocas se han quedado sin pan." Labor Almost Finished On the other hand, in the Public Service Commission it was reported that the work of issuing permits to independent porters to* operate on the routes of the Capital has almost come to an end. Although it has not yet been possible to determine the exact number of permits granted, it was reported that the number of guagüitas authorized to cover the Fernandez Juncos Avenue route amounts to 360. For now, only the 19 large guaguas, whose permits were issued last Wednesday afternoon, will be allowed to travel on that route. Mr. Enrique de Jesus, head of the Transit Division of the Public Service Commission, said yesterday that a study of the transportation on the routes of the Capital will soon be carried out. If it is determined that a greater number of vehicles is required to cover the needs of the public, said agency will authorize additional permits. Protests Vary While some drivers demand that they be given permits to operate their vehicles even on Fernandez Juncos Avenue, others protest that the number granted so far is excessive. The latter base their claim on the fact that the Fernandez Juncos route is too short, and that many of the residents on that route are proffering to go up to Ponce de Leon Avenue to board the Transit Authority buses (Continued on page 14, CoL 6).
celeNt lh