THE NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, BOY: Partly cloudy with scattered a<uaceroe overnight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 77 deg."; low. 69 deg.". Barometric pressure at sea level, at" 4:80 o'clock, 80.08 in." of mercury.
NEW YORK, hand 25. (PU) - At te afternoon today m recorded the following temperatures: Chicago, M: Miami, 82; New York, 48; Wáohlngton. M. Predictions for tomorrow: matormente Boleado; máa ealuroao, tem- " jaratara máa high near da seventy.
MARAÑA JOURNAL
YEAR XXX
Entered a" second ciaos matter. Pool Office, San Juan, P. R
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 26, 1949
NUMBER 13617
FIVE CENTS
S.*A ' ' Cases Rise - Teacher's Disease
Study Reveals Physical Deterioration * Attribute Situation To Low Wages And Overwork By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Hundreds of cases of sickness and numerous cases of nerve disease among the teachers of Puerto Rico have been reported as the result of overwork and poor nutrition, heel . The senior Gonzalo Navas, president "of the Association of" Superlnten* dentea of Schools of Pu'í.'to Rico, raises to the authorities of the Government the problem of the "deterioration flilco and mental of the ma by the exceao of work and the bad feeding due to a little income. The Superintendents of Eicuelai will meet today in an annual assembly, at the Berwind Country Club, from 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. During the morning session, several government officials will address the meeting, and in the afternoon they will discuss the problems of the class and the teaching profession in general. A work done by Mr. Navas at the Negociado do Eat. Navas in the Ethics Office of the Puerto Rico Teachers' Association, it is clear that the number of cases of temporary disability in the island's teaching profession has increased alarmingly during the last 1" 1" year". Among the" applications for assistance made" from 1930 to 1946. "e regia t raro n 275 caaoa de enfermedades nervloaaa. In indicating the most frequent causes of temporary disability in 1,550 cases, 187 were found to be nervous and palpatic syndromes, which are broken down in the following manner: Nouroaia, 48; nervioaa extenuation. 43; nervous poatration, 22; norvloaa irritability, 21; nervous weakness, 14; hiaterla, 2; neurasthenia, 14; aatenla norvloaa. 11: doméñela, 11; and collapse nervloao, 3. The Informo used by ol aeftor Nava", points out. ademáa. another" anfarmodado" do loa organ" "onSorío". "The logical proaunclon is that the data* pointed out above is currently exceeded," comments aeftor Nava. Thousands of Neurotic" "The complexity and the competition that is present in the economic and legal order obliges the production of neurotic products", says aeftor Navaa. Eato assures that in all loa school districts there are. not Informadoa officially, centonare" do maeatroa * with lantern" neurotic" more" or less markeda.
Croo that in the age in which we live some doaia do neuroaia is needed, but points ol danger of degenerating into psychopaths. incapacitated" for a normal life. Paranoid", "monomaniacal", "palpable" and "victim" of the "fear of one's own" hobefrin with. fllcts) teachers "cannot create the right climate, nor inspire, nor guide the child to form a balanced peraomaly and seek social integration", said the auporintondente Navaa. In addition to eitw disease"" of the alaterna norvloao. Oate aeftala other ailment" physical and particular* amount "the" much" affsedones of the throat, the" iealonea of the" vocal cord"" and the partial loss of the voice, due to the excessive uao of the organa orale"", Excessive work The aeftor Navaa says that many" maeatroa ae vqn forced" to work at night in adult teaching" and special" veterans" group", after working hard during the day, due to the low salary they receive. This is not only detrimental to the theater, but the work at the same level is generally poor. A high teaching load, he adds, would have to be increased by increasing the teaching load in Oxtramuroi or intramurals on Saturdays or during the "emana Concludes that it is not possible to carry out any extracurricular" extracurricular" extracurricular" activity" or community education under such" conditions". Salary* Low Accepting that the current salaries are higher than those of the "previous year", Mr. Navaa argues that they "do not correspond to the noble and high category of the profession". He adds that they are not enough to eat well, to have a decent salary, to buy livery and magazines, to live in accordance with the traditions, canonical and demanding "ocíale", and in short, "to mount" in the leader's place". According to data" supplied rodon,temante to EL MUNDO, by seftorita Mabel Studebaker, president 'do the National Educational Aaociación, ol aalerio average of the maeatro in the Xala is well below the Balarlo averaged in 43 states of the Union. This is only slightly higher than that of five Southern states, which turned out to be the poorest in the nation. The wages of the workers in Puerto Rico continue to be low," according to the report, although they have, in fact, "increased" * during the last "fiscal year," and in greater proportion to the increase made by many" other Government agencies.
WASHINGTON, March 25 - (PU) - Senator Charles W. Tobey, Republican of New Hampshire, said today that he has introduced three bills to rectify conditions discovered during his investigation of Textron, Inc. and its use of tax-exempt foundations to provide "risk capital. Tobey was chairman of a House Commerce subcommittee that investigated Textron's operations after the company announced it was closing its mills in Nashua, New Hampshire. One of the bills seeks to amend the Internal Revenue Code to exempt charitable foundations" that cannot prove that they have paid charitable contributions to the company in the past.
Tobey Files Three Textron-related Bills
their beneficiaries 85 percent of their gross income. The bill would require all foundations that invest funds in or lend funds to companies manufacturing products for commerce to register with the Secretary of Commerce and publicly disclose their activities. Reports would be required Periodic reports would be required from such foundations, their beneficiaries and Congress. Senator Tobey said such requirements "would help to discourage the practices currently employed by pseudocharitable foundations. "* The other two bills, which like the first contain the recommendations of the subcommittee on Cont.)
Artists United To Select Prettiest Clerk San Juan
EL MUNDO Will Cooperate In Selection Work. Jack Odell, manager of the Artists United office in Puerto Rico, announced yesterday the start of a contest to find "the prettiest office worker" in San Juan. The announcement was made upon the arrival of Mr. Odell from New York, where he made the pertinent areglOB with the film "My Dear Secretary". The winning girl will have the opportunity to spend ten days in Havana, all expenses paid, as a prize. This contest, which will be jointly sponsored by EL MUNDO and Artistas Unidos, will follow the same guidelines as the one held recently in New York on the occasion of the world premiere of "Secretarla Confidencial" by Artistas Unidos. । 4Cont. on 1st P. 16 - Col. 1)
■■■■br jBii JACK ODELL
Piquete Ora Frente al Acto Pro Pas
L/ Bk i Dmitri Shostakovich. russian composer, "aluda upon arrival at La Guardia airport to attend the Cultural and Scientific conference. (Photo P. A.)
Russian Delegates Evade Series Of Questions From Journalists New York Veterans' Organizations Organize To Continue Demonstrations By Robert MUSEL r NEW YORK, March 25 (PU)-- A picket line of more than fifty people" prayed on their knees" in the middle of Park Avenue in front of the Waldorf-A "toria Hotel today as" delegates" from sixteen nations"" prepared to open a "World Peace Conference." and ..... - ■■ -
A woman ae jumped out of the Une" del' piquets and begged Dmitri Shostakovttch. famous composer and Russian delegate to the Conference, to jump out of the window as did seflora Oksana Kaienkina, a Russian teacher, in search of freedom from the Soviet Consulate last summer. Some placards read: "The poor Soviet slaves go back to Stalin'', "El amigo Pepe qulere 1" peace (written the word "piece") of every nation". Alert Policemen - At noon, about five hundred knelt on the street and began to implore the Lord's mercy...More than five thousand people watched the scene. A determined peddler "pushed his way through the crowd hawking buttons with the name of Cardinal Mlndszenty (of Hungary, recently sentenced to life imprisonment) and crucifixes hanging from a ribbon, for fifteen cents each. The picket was sponsored by the People's Committee for Religious Freedom. It was announced that five thousand members of all the New York vo.toran organizations will begin picketing the conference at about 7:30 p.m., when the delegates will assemble for their opening dinner. Dr. Harlow Shapley, Harvard astronomer and a leading figure at the conference, told reporters to save their questions for tomorrow's discussions. "This has been falsely labeled a philoclimactic meeting,'' Shapley said. "And it is not. Its organizers are American citizens' who are pursuing peace in the midst of growing militarism." He added that it has no relation to conferences of the past. Do they dodge the Question" Apparently in order to dodge the wave of questions prepared for the delegates Dr. Sh<pley explained that Shostakovich, a Russian composer, will fully discuss the artistic and musical attitude in the Soviet Union, in round table discussions. He added that a Soviet scientist will explain the Russian theory of genetics, which has divided the scientific world with the opposition of virtually all Western scientists against the so-called Lysenok Theory that the con(Cont. on P. 16 - Col. 2)
New Drug Gives Hope Against Tisis The Discoverer Of Streptomycin Found - Stops Germ From Growing By WELDEMAR KAEMPFFERT NEW YORK, March 25 (Special to The New York Times) - Selman A. Waksman, M.D., Ph.D., director of the Department of Microbiology of the University of California, New York, has been named as one of the top scientists in the field. head of the Department of Microbiology at Rutgers University, and a disciple of his, Hubert A. LvhevaHer, have discovered a new antibiotic that may prove to be a winner against tuberculosis, if it survives the tests on experimental animals to which it has been subjected. This promising agent is called "neomycin". A complete technical description of what Dr. Waksman and Mr. Lochevalier have accomplished in the isolation and testing of neomycin appears in the latest issue of Science magazine. The following account of how neomycin was discovered and the reasons for considering it as a possible agent against tuberculosis is based on an interview with Dr. Waksman. An antibiotic is not the same as a germicide. Its action consists mostly in the growth of a microorganism, rather than in immediate methane. It does this by making it impossible for the microorganism to nourish itself. Any living creature, of high or low species, that cannot convert nutrition into energy or build tissues, cannot reproduce, eventually, and dies. So it is with the germ. An antibiotic of the right kind prevents it from continually dividing. By stopping growth, the body's natural killers can be directed to kill the invading germs. Logical Consequence Dr. Waksman's discovery of neomycin is a logical consequence of his past work. He discovered and isolated streptotradna in 1942 and streptomycin in 1943. Both are anti-tuberculosis agents, but of the two, streptomycin is the less toxic. Neomycin comes from the same type of moi-like organisms (Cont. on page 18. Col. 8).
Pence Hospital Will Be 3rd to Erect
Guayama Hospital Is Second On List During June First Part Of Psychiatric Hospital To Be Auctioned By lulo HERNANDEZ AQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO Commenting on the Government's "Programa do Ho.<pltale", the Health Commissioner, Dr. Juan A. Pon, stated that "1 Hospital de Diatrito de Ponce will be the third or conatruir. He declared aaimlamo that the first part of the conatruodon of the Hospital do Palqulátrla in Río Piedras, will be subsatated for the sum of 82,000,300 next June, and that the second part will be aired after the first of July. The estimated cost of said hospital is >5,300,000. Dr. Pona referred to "1 Hoapitalea Program. when asked about the statement of aeftor Paul Bauer. Acting Director of the Office of the Bureau of the Capital Construction Dinner, who argued before the House Treasury Committee that the Government of Puerto Rico would not be able to provide all that is needed in the next five years" of the federal capital construction program and that it would not be able to provide it either, perhaps in the next 25 years. Mr. Bauer also said that the Guayama Howltal would have to be cor to noise before the Ponce Howltal, arguing that the latter has no plans and that the Guayama Howltal is smaller. In this regard, the Commissioner of Health stated that the Ponce Hospital will be the third to be built, after the Psychiatric Hospital, and that its construction is assured with this year's appropriation. He explained to Dr. Pona that the Legislature of Puerto Rico will allocate $81,900,000 for the Capital Program. He said that the Insular Governm ent is having a difficult ""♦- year to obtain the federal funds for the Hospital Program. Dr. Pone reviewed all the appropriations that have been made by the Legislature for the program since 1947, and expressed that in order to develop said program so as to provide the Island with all the hospitals necessary to cover the needs of the entire population of the Island, it would require 8300,000,000. About the Arecjbo House The Commissioner of Health was talking this morning with the Administrator of the Insular Aqueduct Service, Sergio Cueva" Buttamante, the Executive Director of the Puerto Rico Housing Authority, "efior Céiar Cordero Dávlln and other" officials" about the problem of the" 200 families of Arecjbo who lost their houses"" due to the recent tidal waves. The government is interested in finishing the 200-unit house that is being built there to move these families, but the sanitary problem it faces is that the sewage discharge, which was supposed to be connected to the Arecibo sewage system, will not be connected to it because it has not been finished. The possibility has been raised that the discharge will be made directly and in a provisional manner to the Arecibo sewer, without the sewage receiving treatment. According to a 1947 law, Dr. Pens said, water pollution is prohibited. Currently in the United States there is a serious problem in this regard, since the water there is highly polluted. This has prompted federal legislation, which covers the United States and Puerto Rico. Health would allow it The doctor Pone said that we are facing an emerging problem on the one hand, and of water pollution on the other, and that it should be solved, inclining him to allow discharges into the river, in (Continued on page 16, Col, 8)
Géigel Requests There Be 2 Transit Cuts
One For S. Juan And Another Rio Piedra" Agents Would Have Printed Form. Cases to be heard within 4*8 hours By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Two courts have been recommended, one in San Juan and the other in Rio Piedras, dedicated exclusively to traffic law infraction cases. The bills submitted yesterday by the Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco, through the Governor's office, provide for swift and severe penalties for traffic offenders. The members of the Uniformed will act as denouncers, witnesses and cltators of the cases". Following the general practice in the United States in relation to traffic offenses, the license of negligent drivers may be cancelled here in the courts. During a meeting held Thursday at the Justice Department, the Attorney General called the attention of the municipal judges of San Juan and Rio Piedras, to the practices of some imaglstrado", to impose low" fine" in crime" that affect public safety, he said, Procedure to Follow One of the bills "ometidos a la Legislatura fija el procedimiento a seguir en los casos" de Infracciones a las leyes, reglas y ordenanzas, sobre automóviles y tránsito. The policeman will have a booklet of already printed denunciations, in which the offender will be automatically cited. According to the wording that will be printed in these reports, the "alleged traffic law violator, who will receive a copy of the report, will be summoned to appear, within 48 hours, at the Municipal Court. This procedure, according to the Prosecutor, is similar to that carried out in the United States and facilitates the rapid "ramltación" of the cases. In order to prevent the offending driver from giving false information, the police officer will keep his license, which will be stamped indicating the crime committed, if convicted in court. In addition, it would be a crime not to appear in court within the 48 hours established by law to respond to the complaint. The Prosecutor says that more than 60 percent plead guilty, thus facilitating the processing of the cases. Those who plead not guilty would be tried the following week. According to current practices, the police officer denounces the alleged offender, sends the complaint a month later, the Court sets the case for two or three months later, and in all this processing the case takes five or six months, if it is ever heard. One of the chambers of the San Juan Municipal Court, in monthly shifts, is dedicated exclusively to traffic cases. When the filing and hearings of these cases are so numerous that the chamber on duty cannot handle them, another of the Criminal Chambers shall cooperate with the first one in this case, according to the project. Since there is legislation in force that does not allow the judges to take turns, unless it is by express disposition of the Prosecutor, it will now be provided so that they may do so. Since there are only two chambers in the Municipal Court of Rio Piedras, another bill provides for the creation of an additional chamber. In this court, as in the San Juan court, one of the chambers would also be dedicated exclusively to hear traffic cases, on a monthly basis. Severe Penalty" For Driving a Motor Vehicle (Continued on p. 12, Col. 6)
Public Agencies Included in Reorganization Program
Barreto Perez Denounced Use of Police at Docks By S. GAIvm Mataran" Editor of EL MUNDO Something "that is not clear" is happening on the waterfront, according to Senator Ramon Barreto Perez yesterday. He added that he "fien" information in the sense that several shipping companies are eliminating guards on the docks, using instead the public force to guard their properties. The manifestations of "enadir Barreto Perez were made" during the discussion that "e originated in the Senate, when "enador Celestino Iriarte, proposed that "e appointed a Special Commission of the Senate to Inveatigar the consequences that may have for" employees and workers. The purchase of the properties of the Nf*w York and Porto Rico Line by the Bull Inaular Line. Senator Iriarte said that this operation in no way benefits "the people of Puerto Rico and that "it only benefits the Bull Insular Line, by acquiring rights that make it a stronger company, tending to establish a monopoly in maritime transportation between New York City and San Juan". He argued at length about the alleged threat to the pals, in relation to its maritime transportation, "if in the future this nionopollatlca path continues," and added that the employees" and workers are the ones who will suffer the consequences. Víctor Gutiérrez Franqul refuted Senator Iriarte, as to the need for the Senate to intervene in said Investigation or study, and proposed that a Special Committee be appointed to study the matter, and in turn recommend to the Senate whether or not to appoint the Commission requested by Senator Iriarte. Senator Ramón Rarratn Pérez proposed that upon the appointment of the Committee, it be instructed to submit its report before 12:00 midnight last night, since at that time the term established by law for the filing of bills was expiring, and it might be necessary to legislate to that effect. The motion of Senator Barreto Pérez was defeated, and a Special Committee was then appointed to study the matter and recommend to the House the appointment of the Commission requested by Senator Iriarte. Said Committee was composed of the following senators: Víctor Gutiérrez Franoul. Ernesto Juan Fnnfrlas. Heraclio H. Rivera Colón. Ramón Barreto Pérez. Lionel Fernández Méndez, Bolívar Pacán and Celestino Iriarte. Problem in Yabucoa Requested yesterday the healer Ernesto Carrasquillo the appointment of a Senate Commission, to investigate an order transmitted to his" colono" by the Central Roig. to leave 15 percent of "u cane standing, for not being able to mill the mlima. Eato has brought by conaecuencla that numeroao" colono" of the zone of Yabucoa, "egún expreaó the healer Carraquillo, "ae see abocado" to the ruin", for having compromised Carraiquillo, ""e see abocadles ber laa loss" that e "to oca "¡onarla to each one of it". A "settlers' committee" visited Senator Carrasquillo yesterday, in his office in the Senate, to explain the problem to him. The Commission was appointed for this purpose, after the approval of a motion by Senator Iriarte to extend the investigation to the (Cont. on p. 13- Col. 5)
GOVERNOR MUÑOZ MARIN De Jesús Says No Salaries Will Be Reduced He clarifies that the Confusion Is Due to Procedure Used in Budget The Director of the Budget Bureau, Seftor Roberto de Jesús, stated yesterday that in the model budget submitted by the Governor * to the Legislative Assembly no salary reductions have been recommended for any do. De Jesus clarified that although some positions appear with less salary than the one enjoyed by the current incumbent, this is because the procedure followed this year is to set the minimum salary of the position; but in a separate place, the necessary amounts are assigned to complete the salaries enjoyed by the current employees. Mr. De Jesús gave the following statement to the press on this matter: "Since the Modified Budget was submitted by the Governor to the Legislature, this Office has been receiving numerous inquiries from agency heads and public employees on the presentation used for the first time in this act of all the plv." of the General Classification Plan. I wish to clarify that in no case has the Bureau of the Budget recommended any reduction in the salaries currently earned by public employees of the agencies included in the Model Budget. The laws in force specifically prohibit the reduction of salaries of any employee subject to the General Classification Plan. "The Act .345. approved on May 12, 1947 (Personnel Act) in its Section 1.3 has the following clause: "Provided, that upon the effective date of the first retrenchment plan formulated pursuant to this Act, no employee shall earn a salary lower than that which he/she earned on the effective date of this Act", "And Act 282. approved on May 15, 1948. Section 6, subsection (d). states: "IF the employee is receiving a salary that exceeds the maximum rate prescribed for the corresponding class, no change shall be made in the current salary while" he/she is performing the same position, but the salary rate of "his/her successor "shall be adjusted to the previous salary rate". It is clear that the Bureau of the Budget, nor any executive officer, has the authority to reduce salaries of any public employee who is within the General Classification Plan. Purpose M Simplify "The Bureau of the Budget, if it prepares the Model Budget for the year 1949-50, in its efforts to simplify the budget, will be able to reduce the salaries of all public employees in the General Classification Plan, and to reduce the salaries of all public employees in the General Classification Plan.
Muñoz Recommends Reduction In Land Authority Spending
Luis Muñoz Marin yesterday sent to the House of Representatives the budgets for operating expenses of the agencies not included in the General Budget Law for fiscal year 1949-50. The agencies included in the bill sent by the Chief Executive are the Land Authority, the State Insurance Fund and the Industrial Commission. The recommended operating expense budget for the Land Authority in the Governor's bill is >202,160, or >289,780 less than the agency's budget for the fiscal year 1948*49, when operating expenses amount to >471,780. Other Details The main savings in the Land Authority's
The major savings in the operating expenses of the Land Authority are made, in accordance with the Governor's recommendations, in the divisions of Title VI and Title V. These are eliminated, eliminating expenditures amounting to >235,060. The remaining savings consist of the elimination of positions in other divisions of the Land Authority. In the budget for the Office of the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund, Governor Muñoz Marín recommends an increase from 8617,225.50 to 5656,896. For the Industrial Commission, the Executive Office recommends a budget of 899,888. vs. 8111,204 quo. for the total fiscal year 1948-49.
Bill Offers Thirty-Day Term For Legislative Rejection The Government reorganization bill, introduced in the Legislature now assembled, empowers the Governor to consolidate or coordinate all or any part of any agency, "if an investigation proves the necessity for such action. The" reorganization plans recommended by the Governor, which would be studied" by a commission appointed for that purpose, would be submitted to the Legislature. Each plan shall become effective after 30 calendar days during which the Legislature is in session, if during such period the two Houses have not passed a concurrent resolution stating that they do not favor the reorganization plan. In cases of special """ions, the time is limited to 12 days. 75,000 would be provided for the purposes of the Act. Text of the Bill The text of the bill to reorganize the executive branch and agencies of the Government is as follows: "Article I.- This Act may be cited as the 'Reorganization Act. "(a.) Agency.- Whenever the term "agency" is used in this Act, "1 it means any agency, authority, company, service, bureau, division, bureau, office, commission, board, instrumentality, public corporation, administration, independent establishment, function, or any other body or agency of the executive branch of the Insular Government. "(b) Reorganization. - For purposes of this Act, the term "reorganization" means any transfer, consolidation, coordination, modification, abolition, and reorganization referred to in Section 4, except that it shall not mean "abolition" or "consolidation" when such term is used in relation to executive departments. (a) The Governor shall review and from time to time reexamine the organization of all executive agencies and departments of the Government and determine what changes are necessary to achieve the following ends: "(1) To promote the best execution of the law. (2) to reduce expenditures and promote economy to the maximum extent consistent with the efficient operation of the Government; "(3) to increase the efficiency of the operations of the Government to the maximum extent practicable; "(4) to group, coordinate, and consolidate agencies and functions of the Government, to the maximum extent practicable, consistent with the efficient operation of the Government, to the maximum extent practicable; "(5) to promote the efficient operation of the Government, to the maximum extent practicable; "(6) to promote the efficient operation of all executive agencies and departments of the Government, and to determine what changes are necessary to achieve the following ends: "(1) To promote the best execution of the laws of the Government. (5) reduce the number of agencies" by consolidating under one head those" that have similar functions" and abolish those" agencies" that are not necessary" for the efficient conduct of the Government; and "(6) avoid duplication and duplication of effort. "(b) The Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico declares that the public interest demands the accomplishment of the ends specified in subsection (a) of this section and that such ends can be achieved to a large extent by preceding in accordance with the provisions of this Act and can be accomplished by this Act more expeditiously than by the enactment of specific legislation. Reorganization Plan "Article 4,-Provided that the Governor, after an Inveetigocáén. (1) 1* the transfer of all or any part of any agency, or all or any functions thereof, to the jurisdiction and dominion of any other agency; - "(2) the consolidation or coordination of all or any part of any agency, or all or any functions thereof, with all or any part of any other agency or its functions; or "(3) the consolidation or coordination of any part of any agency or of the foundations thereof with any other part of the same agency or of its foundations: (4) the abolition of all or any part of any agenda, which agency or part does not have, or will not have when the reorganization plan comes into effect, any functions; or "(5) the reorganization of all or any of the executive departments is necessary to achieve one or more of the purposes of section 3(a), shall prepare a reorganization plan to make such reorganizations as may be necessary to achieve one or more of the purposes of section 3(a). on page 12, CoL 4)