THE WORLD
Molotov Deposed from Office in Russia
WEATHER FORECAST FOR . LA ISLA, BOY: - Partly cloudy, eon aguncoroo scattered". IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - Maximum temperature, 71 degrees: minimum, M. Pro1 alon barometric at sea level, at 4:80 o'clock, 19.96 inches" of mercury. No rain was recorded.
v NEW YORK"' monkey A (FU). - At La Guardia Airport: high, 24,000 feet; vl "lbill* dad: aela millo: wind from the south and southeast: 10 miles per hour; forecast for tomorrow: mostly sunny and cool. Lowest temperature just over 80.
MORNING JOURNAL
NUMBER 13596
FIVE CENTS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 5, 1949
ANNUAL XXX
Entered as second elees matter, Post Office. San Juan. P. R.
Governor Asks APA and Laborers to Continue Meetings
- Sierra To Meet With Workers Goldsmith Conference In Washington On Possibility Of Strike By Lulo Ránche" Cappa and Juan Martin" Chape! Governor Luí" Muñoz Marín believes that the sugar cane industry can do better than what it is paying, but it cannot pay what the workers' organization is paying. This was stated last night. The Commissioner of Labor, who held a conference with the Governor and several labor leaders, extended an invitation to the leaders of the Sugar Union and the Free Federation for a meeting to be held today, Saturday, at ten o'clock in the morning. The meeting, which is an effort to avoid the beginning of the strike announced for Monday, will be held at the office of the Department of Labor. At Wáshlngton federal conciliator Charle" Goldsmith, conferred eon the" authority"" on the- possibility of the strike at the Tala. Yesterday the Governor spent the whole afternoon in his private quarters in Fortaleza in conference with the Commissioner of Labor, Mr. Fernando Sierra Bordela, with the President of the Labor Committee of the Reproaontantoa Summit and President of the Sugar Union, Mr. Pedro Vega Borrío, and Mr. Armando Rivera, secretary of the Union. Mr. Vega Barrio and Mr. Sierra Bordeela and Mr. Rivero refused to make any statement about the meeting. The Governor stated that he had] recommended to the Labor Committee that it meet with the union in the belief that a reasonable agreement would be reached in a short time, as he had data showing that there was scope for satisfactory negotiations. Lat statement" of the Governor ton la" algulentei: "I have given study both to the basic problo- , ma of the sugar cane industry and to the immediacy of the pending labor-management negotiation. I believe that immediately after the latter has been solved, a valid and effective way must be taken for Puerto Rico to face the basic problem of which it is still the main industry. "On the immediate negotiation ' I have examined data" reliable" to- , bre the induitrla: and ¿ato" levan me , to the conclusion that the Induitrla 1 of caAa-sugar can improve lot jornalea that is paying: but I quo I have no way to improve- < lot to the level tollcitado by lat ' organization" labor", Persisting on the one hand in not improving 1" joma* . I" or on the other on that they pay you jornalo" that the induatrla does not produce to pay, not "e justifies to bate do lo" dato". "Pare mi is evident that there is reasonable scope to negotiate in good faith on wages and home to conclusions that are fair, thus avoiding the daflo do strike, or do its unnecessary prolongation. On behalf of the entire Puerto Rican community, I invite both parties to continue negotiating in order to avoid the strike, or its prolongation if it should begin, in a spirit of good faith toward themselves and the rest of their fellow citizens. "I have instructed the Labor Commissioner to meet with the parties in the confidence that a noble agreement will be reached soon. Commissioner Sierra Bordela sent a telegram to the leaders of the Sindicato Azucarero and the Federación Ubre, for a meeting to be held at the offices of the Labor Department today, Saturday, at 2:00 p.m. For his part, Mr. Nicolás Nogueras Rivera, general secretary of the Federation. Libro, denounced the fact that the "employers of the sugar industry are croaking a lock-out, forcing thousands of workers into unemployment". The complaint was made to Governor MuAoz Marin, in a telegram sent to him by the Federationist leader. Muñoz Marín answered the communication by suggesting to Mr. Nogueras Rivera that he proceed to file before the Labor Relations Board the corresponding charge against the employers. Labor Relations Board the corresponding charge against the employers. In order to avoid losses in the cane cut, the colonists all over the island have completely suspended cutting, according to Mr. Miguel Martorell, former president of the Farmers Association. (Cent, on page 16, Col. 7).
3200,000 Unemployed in the U.S. This Is Highest Number In Postwar Era, Truman Warns WASHINGTON, March 4 - (P* U) - The Census Bureau reported today that the nation's number of unemployed rose to an "unprecedented" postwar level of 3,200,000 in February. This figure represented an increase of 550,000 over January and an increase of 1,250,000 since the first of the year. The Census Bureau estimated that the number of Americans "deaempied" in February was six hundred thousand over that of the same month last year. There were 57,168,000 Americans employed in February, compared with 57,414,000 in January. In February, 1948, the figure was 57,. 139,000. The Bureau said that the "umen(Cont. on page 16. Col. 2) Health Extends Inspection Of Sales Campaign Initiated Will Also Be Followed In fayamón and Río Piedras The sanitary campaign to improve Me vónUá embalan tí" will be founded in San Juan, in the towns of Bayamón and Rio Piedras, according to Mr. Jorgo Mejias, acting director of the Food Section of the Department of Health. Mr. Mojíes said that the Public Health Units throughout the Island have to develop their campaigns independently, but that they are expected to be similar to the metropolitan campaign, in the achievement of their objectives. He said that the health campaign to improve street vending is very important in the metropolitan area, due to the large population that resides in that area, and that the Department of Health aims to improve to the maximum the handling and sale of food for public consumption, which is distributed by street vendors. He assured that the Directors of the Public Health Units, as well as the Sanitation Officers of the different districts, are developing plans in this sense, and that it is to be expected that the campaign will be accentuated throughout the Island, but independently of the work in San Juan. The executors of the campaign (Cont. on page 15, Col. 3)
Andrei Vishinsky Replaces him in the Foreign Portfolio
id*' The photograph above shows Andrei Vishinsky, who has replaced Molotov in the post of Soviet Foreign Minister, in a characteristic orator's pose. Below, the deposed Molotov (center) conversing with Jam" F. B.vm" (left), then Secretary of State of the United States, and with Georg" Bidault, then Foreign Minister of France, during a meeting" of the Big Four in Paris. (Associated Press photo). Minister of Foreign Trade, Mikoyan, Was Also Relieved - Official Note Issued By Radio Moscow Gives No Reasons For Changes By R. H. 8HACKFORD LONDON, March 4.) - Moscow radio announced tonight that Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, Russian Minister of Foreign Relations for more than ten years, and A. I. Mikoyan, former Minister of Foreign Trade, have been relieved of their duties by the supreme presidium.
duty" by the supreme presidium of the Soviet. It revolted, moreover," the Moscow radio that Andrei Y. Vlihlnaky. Vlihlnaky. deputy minister of Foreign Relations", whose" criticism" of" the" Western" nation" have provoked much" Incident" .in 1" postwar" International" assembly", has" been" appointed to" replace Mo* lotov. Mo "cú's radio announcement announced the largest reorganization of the Ru "o Gabinets that has taken place since the war. The Mo "cú broadcast said: "The Supreme Presidium of the Sovlet has relieved the Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Comrade V. M. Molotov, of his duties as Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, and has appointed (Continued on page 14 col. 6.)
200 Government Cars Use Private License Plate According to Report Submitted by Interior, Official Cars Reach 344 Doicientos automobiles", of the In "ular Government circulate with private" license plate", according to the Report submitted to the Senate by the Comíalonado d" lo Interior. The list of the "automobiles" with a private license plate of the "DIATLNTA" Inland Government "Agency" includes: one "automobile" with a "license plate" assigned to the "Transportation" Office; 24 in the Inland Police Corps; 3 in the "House of Representatives"; 43 in the "Fluvial "Source"! 43 at Fuente" Fluvial"; 4 at the Communications Authority; 4 at the Home Authority"; 41 at the Land Authority"; 9 at the University of Puerto Rico; 29 at the Aqueduct Service": 6 at the Development Company; 16 at the Transportation Authority. All" "to" automobile". according to the (Cont. on page 24, Col. 5)
By CHARLOTTE MOULTON WASHINGTON, March 4. (FU)- The House Banking Committee today overwhelmingly approved a bill to continue rent control for another 15 months and end the voluntary 15 percent rent increase under present law. The measure, approved by a majority of 20 to 4, is stronger than the current rent law, but is not as "strong" as the Administration had hoped. Committee Chairman Brent Spence, D-Kent. Brent Spence, D-Kentucky, said the measure will reach the House floor next week. The Senate Banking Committee is considering a similar measure. The current rent controls will expire on March 31. The House panel approved the 15-month extension, falling 9 months short of the Administration's request for a two-year extension, after rejecting, by a vote of 16 to 9, an amendment "obro right" clviloi
House Banking Committee Extends Rent Control
Barratt O'Hard, D-Illinois. O'Hard had proposed that priorities for veterans in the sale or rental of new homes, which are continued in legislation under consideration, be applied without regard to race, creed or color, House Democratic leaders insisted that civil rights not be included in legislation dealing with other issues. The bill would reinstate federal controls on evictions, which housing developer Tig* he E. Woods calls the "key" to effective control, and authorize the Government to sue overcharging landlords for tre" V " CM eI the amount so charged. In addition, the Committee agreed to give Woods power to reinstate maximum rents in those regions where controls had been lifted since June 30, 1947. (Cont. on. p. IB, Col. 3).
Compendium of News
Catholic "bishop" of San Juan and Poneo ask Muño" M to pronounce on sterilization. Sonador Quiñón" says legislative "economy plan" includes permanent changes. No place for challenge made to Selective Service law. The * contract to build a frieze factory in Rio Grande was authorized. The House Banking Committee agreed to extend rent control. Prosecutor" and criminal judge of San Juan are treated as a guideline for action. Norway joins Atlantic Pact; rejects Russian offer to sign non-aggression treaty. Iranian labor bill approved by Senate committee. - Mtableeor plans private "trade school" on the island. Unemployed Hogan already at 8,190,000 in United States. o - o Traman to reorganize Defense Department. - - - 200 government cars reportedly use private license plates - - - o Chinese Parliament "raffled the resignation of Prime Minister Sun Fo.
resignation of Prime Minister Sun Fo. They approve project to "tudlar ti barrio Florida Adentro should be constituted in an independent municipality of Barceloneta. 7 " e * Authority" aguadillana" will raise to the Governor and legislator" diverse" problems of bu community. . * * * New Defenm Secretary advocates that the Nation " keep strong. Aponte Investigates* Police sergeant's complaint against prosecutor Marchán. e - * * Russian mission that "was blocked in American zone sailed to its sector. Health extends to Bayamon and Rio Piedras, the campaign of inspection of the street sales. - The French government is preparing to stop the fight against the reds and the right wing. - The French government prepares a strike to fight against the Reds and the right wing. - The number of Protestant ministers under arrest in Bulgaria is increasing. - Governor asks 1" labor" and the APA to negotiate.
The situation of Pellejas is analyzed.
1 lis- Closure Would Affect 25,000 People. 90% of Colonists Say Cane Growing Would Cease; Owners Witness ADJUNTAS, March 4. gu "l Rivera, correspondent of "EL MUNDO" in Fonce) -About 20,000 to 25,000 people would be harmed if "the Pelleja plant closes," and "1 90 percent of the settlers would stop growing their" cane," according to the plant's comptroller, Mr. Lull M. Alfau, during a joint legislative committee meeting which began today at the plant itself. The hearings, aimed at finding a way to avoid the announcement of the plant's closure, were presided over by the representative, Ms. Mari Libertad Gomez. For the House of Representatives, in addition, Messrs. Luis Santallz Capeitany. Benjamin Ortiz, Leopoldo Figueroa and Francisco Diaz Marchand. Carlos Rahassa. Guadalupe G. Pérez and Mario Canales. Representing the Senate were Senator Fran, cisco L. Anielml. Agustin Burgo", Juan Dévlla Diaz, Bolivar Pagén. Celestino Triarte. Ramón Barreto Pérez and Bernardo Méndez. Provoked by Editorial The purpose of holding the, vit. tas "urged when, as a result of an editorial in EL MUNDO raising the problem of the Central Pellejas. A resolution was introduced in the Senate, by Senators Anselml and Burgos, which was approved, the operative part of which reads as follows: "R "uélva"" the Senate of Puerto Rico qu" -" designate" a commission composed of 7 samado, res to qu" "n the date more" pró. xlma s" moves to the referred C "n. tral. Pellejas, in e] municipality ds Adjuntas and there celsbr" a hearing.... The aforementioned Commission is authorized to draw up a plan to maintain the plant in activity, either by transferring the property thereof to the said settlers and workers, or by incorporating it into the Land Authority, or by any other means which, in the opinion of said Commission, will succeed in averting the threat of unemployment that looms over this important mountainous region of the Island. In the House of Representatives, the same motion was made by Representatives Gó. mez, and Mr. Mario Canales. Present" At the beginning of today's 1"> hearings, the following were present, in addition to the 1". gislators mentioned, representing government agencies: Héctor Zaya", Roberto Lefebr" y Rubén Bonilla, d" Agricultural Extension; Ramón Colón Torres, Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, and Lui" A. Nazario, In "pector, Cooperativa"; Jusn González, Rafael Durand, for the Junta d" Pía. niflcación; Marlo Marrero, of the Plan d" Emergencia d" Guerra; Joié Acota Velarde, of the Autoridad de Tierra"; Franctaco Rodríguez, of the Departamento del Trabajo; Jorga Toledo, of the Comisión d" Servicio Público; Cándido Ló. pez, of the Banco d" Ayuda Federal; Jalma Pérez Roi,g, of the Admlnis. tración de Hogares del Agricultor. Also present were the Mayor of Adjuntas, Mr. Juan B. Barce, ló; the Mayor of Utuado, Dolores Rivera Candelario; Ermelindo Santana, Eduardo Paz, Agustín Massanat, municipal assemblymen of Utuado; and Manuel Rivera, mayor of Jayuya. As first witness testified the (Cont. on page 18, Col. 8)
Catholic Bishops Ask Muñoz To Define Himself: On Sterilization 1 I
Defense Organization To Be Changed Truman Expected To Send Report To Congress On Reorganization By Lyle C. Wiloon WASHINGTON, March 4. -President Truman was almost ready today to reorganize the national defense establishment to counter charges that it is wasteful, lacks coordination and requires more energetic leadership. The President will send to Congress a recommendation to rewrite the Armed Services Unification Act, passed in 1947. The main objective is the true unification of the armed services so that the Army, Navy and Air Force function as a national defense group on the basis of a sound military strategy. Johnson's appointment to the number two Cabinet post was also one of Mr. Truman's great political debts. It was Johnson who raised funds for the President's campaign last year, when many prominent Democrats were unwilling to contribute and others claimed that contributions could not be made. Has Intereee" Johnson is a Charleston lawyer, with substantial industrial and banking interests, including a directorship in the Consolidated Vultee Aircraft Corporation; another in the General Aniline A Film Corporation, and another in the General Dyestuff Corporation. Forrestal was head of Dillon, Read A Company, investment bankers, when he became Assistant Secretary of 1" Navy in 1940. The reaction of Senator Millard E. Tydlngs, Democrat of Maryland, chairman of the Senate Armed SeiVlclos Committee, and another" Capitol Hill figure" indicates that Johnion's nomination will receive quick confirmation when it reaches the Senate. In the Congre "o "e has noted a general sentiment for Forrestal to leave Government service. Will end Manto 31 Forrestal's eight and a half years in the Cabinet, and in the small Cabinet, will end March 31. A bald, portly Johnson is a "lawyer with administrative ability and a firm belief in his ability to fill a Cabinet position, From June 1937 to July 1940, Johnson was Under Secretary of War in the Cabinet of the late President Roosevelt. For most of that period, Johnson was in ill-concealed conflict with the Secretary of War, Harry H. Woodring of Kan■as, whose position Johnson was generally believed to have coveted. When Woodring left in June 1940, the position was given to Henry L. Stimson, a veteran of the Theodore Roosevelt and Herbert Hoover Cabinets and a Republican. Johnson left the War Department shortly thereafter. He came from the Navy Forrestal went on to head the national defense establishment from the Secretary of the Navy. Some significance is given to the fact that a shoulder to the his(Cont. on Pg. 16 - Col 7)
'': 'IH B Monsignor Jaime Eduardo McManus, Bishop of Fonce. I ' I I I I Monsignor Jalma Podro Davia, bishop of Ban Juan/ There will be action on the savings plan Senate President says it is made up of permanent changes Senate President Samuel R. Quiñones believes that what is needed is to implement the legislative savings plan as soon as possible. Senator Quiflonei assures that this year, the consideration of the House preamble will be brought forward. Proceeding to Act Senator Quiñones authorizes the following statements: z "I do not wish to give - and I believe that no one intends to give - a polemic tone to the healthy purpose of adopting an economy plan in the expenses of the Legislature. I believe that what is necessary is - quite simply - to carry out such a plan, and this must be done as soon as possible. We have always approved the budgets of the Chambers during the last days of the legislative session, but this year we intend to do so as soon as possible, so that the economic plan may begin to bear fruit. "As it is not a question of western and transitory changes, but of modifications with a permanent purpose, the plan must be carefully structured so that it does not omit any essential elements for the efficiency of the legislative work. That is what we are doing. And the important thing is to do it. And we are not going to digress into polemics that can do nothing (Cont. on page 18, Col. 7).
Aguadilla Authorities Will Raise Problems With Muñoz
The Municipal Assembly of Aguadilla, during its February 9 session, unanimously agreed to dispense a visit to the Governor of Fuerto Rico, together with the Mayor of Aguadilla and the legislators of the District, to present various problems of that community. The Mayor of Aguadilla, Mr. Rafael Cabán Peña, has expressed to the Governor, Mr. Muñoz Marín, that "in spite of the fact that the Municipal Administration that I have been presiding is confronted with serious and multiple social and economic problems, I feel optimistic about the success of the same, since I am sure that the legislators and you, as the first ojoeu*
tlvo, will do justice to my people". Mr. Cabán Peña has also informed the governor of Puerto Rico that the municipal administration is interested in having projects that improve Aguadilla's situation presented in the current session of the House of Representatives. Improvements for Aguadilla The projects referred to by the Mayor of Aguadilla are seven, the first of which is the construction and modernization of the Degetau Recreation Plaza, which is located in the center of the city. The other projects include the construction of a second unit (Cont. on page 16, Col. 7).
In a pastoral letter to be "read during several Sundays" in all the Catholic churches of Puerto Rico, Bishops Jaime Pedro Davia, of San Juan, and Jaime Eduardo McManus, of Ponce, urge "Governor Muñoz Marin to pronounce himself on the issue of sterilization and contraception. Both" heads of the" Catholic Church in Puerto Rico condemn, on the occasion of the beginning of Lent, what they call "a horrendous crime", in the" contraceptive methods, declaring: "Venerable Brothers and Beloved" Sons: "The traditional motives that" do not" urge a faithful Lent are presented to us this year accompanied" by another" two motives that are of particular interest. "In the first place, this is the year of preparation for the Holy Year, which was officially initiated by His Holiness Pope Pius XII. at the Christmas Vigil in Rome. And it would seem that no other occasion would be more appropriate than the Holy Week to form with generosity and fulfill with paraeverance the firm purpose of putting our souls in order, and to prepare ourselves to enjoy abundantly and profitably the extraordinary graces and blessings proper to the Holy Year. The second motive, equally proper to this year, is one to which we wish to refer at greater length. The war against God has been unleashed on the "legs" behind the so-called Iron Curtain and the reflection of that same a" plrltu of militant atheism in our own midst, make it imperative that we devote our prayers and penances this Lent in large measure to offering reparation to God for the "insult" and outrages which "they inflict on Him, His servants and His laws: (a) while demanding that we intensify our supplications for the conversion of those who with implacable hatred persecute God and His Church. "A demonstration of forgetfulness of God's law has been given right here among us, when it has recently been said over the heads of public officials that the only hope for a better Puerto Rico lies in the promotion of contraceptive practices and sterilization. Officially, facts and data have been gathered to present with some ostentation the frightening picture of what would happen if our population continued to grow at the same rate as it does today. And while very little is said, much less done, to inculcate in our people a deeper and firmer sense of decency and responsibility and to favor the establishment of a standard of family life based on morality so as to reduce the high percentage of illegitimacy, a great cry of alarm is raised to proclaim that only contraception and sterilization can save Puerto Rico. . "So we would conclude that self-control seems to have been officially discarded by the Government, perhaps because it is judged too difficult and painful, since it implies personal sacrifice. And indeed, without the grace of God - and, much worse, with the elimination of God - 'self-control is quite impossible! What has happened, then, to the moral sensibilities of men who have dared to publicly urge that God's law be ridiculed and discarded? Have we now reached that horrid stage of our so-called progress, when the Government considers that the laws of men must supersede those of God? If so, at such a juncture, the Church cannot remain mute, and therefore. We are compelled to warn that abortion is a crime! sterilization is a mutilation! contraception is impurity! In spite of the undeniable unbridled morality, the inevitable fruit of the materialistic progress, empty of all moral content, of our days, this unbridled morality has not yet succeeded in uprooting all sense of delicacy. It is because of this still existing sense of delicacy that the public propagandists of neo-Malthusian practices have not yet succeeded in eradicating all sense of delicacy.