THE NANDO
NEW YORK, Feb. 18 (PU). - Temperature* today: New York, 44: Chicago. 52; Washington, M; Miami, 80. At La Guardia Airport: Altuar* maximum, unlimited; vlglblbllity, eight mlllaa; wind, from the south at fifteen mile" per hour. Forecast for tomorrow: mée warm weather. followed by showers; temperatures máe altea, between fifty and sixty degrees; winds from the southwest.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: - Partly cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 77 degrees: low, 76. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:60 p.m., 80.06 inches of mercury. No rain was recorded.
DAILY MORNING
A<rn VVTY Entered m "econd clara matter, ANU AA1A Poat Office. San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1949
NUMBER 13582
FIVE CENTS
Senate Subcommittee Suggests Raising Minimum Wage On Island
Juan o Hernandez Has Signed Contract With Metro Company
Tobey Explains Report In Light Of Textron Case. Denea Investigate Here By William jTdORVILLIER WASHINGTON, Feb. 18 -(Es| pedal for EL MUNDO -A Senate subcommittee today urged that Congress raise the minimum wage in Puerto Rico, and suspend federal spending on the island "while the Puerto Rican government continues its current tax exemption program" for new indu*' trias. Those recommendations appear in the report of a subcommittee of the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, chaired by Senator Charles W. Tobey, Republican of New Hampshire, who last year investigated the closing of textile plants in New England by Textron, Incorporated. Tohey told a press conference that "we must consider the human factors" of Puerto Rico's "poverty, overpopulation and high birth rate," but that action must be taken "to protect U.S. blue-collar jobs" against the unfair advantage Puerto Rico has over U.S. industries. "He said those "advantages" are tax exemptions, low wages, and "high subsidies" paid by the federal government, which make it possible for Puerto Rico to attract U.S. industries. Tohey lost the chairmanship of! his special committee when the Democrats took control of Congress last November. The report, however, was rendered to the full committee and, Tohey said, "|"a reegmendations will be made to the various* Senate committees that have jurisdiction over the issues involved." "This is a difficult problem," he said, "because we have to look beyond the human element in Puerto Rico. We have to level the playing field ! more." Tax Exemption One of the factors that the "ubcoI mi tea brought out," he said, "was that the tax exemption allowed, under federal law, Textron directors to make large profits on the island and deposit the money in banks in the metropolis, free of taxation, to be loaned to Textron subsidiaries, thus gaining a great advantage over their competitors in the United States, who pay federal taxes on their profits. When asked by this correspondent if the subcommittee had considered the effect on the Puerto Rican economy of implementing the recommendations made in the report, Tohey said: "We could not consider the effect on the Puerto Rican economy. It was impossible to get exact figures on federal subsidies from the Department of the Interior, or anywhere else. "I want to be perfectly fair. There is a big problem involved. Puerto Rico is impoverished, su- ) perpopulated, and suffers from a high birth rate. Your gobler- । has no awakened minds that are trying to solve his" problems. "The Governor, Mr. Muñoz Marín, is a genius who would shine ' anywhere, a great execu- ¡ tlvo and administrator. However, he (Cont. to Pg. 14 - Col. 5)
He will play one of the leading roles in the film of Faulkner's play By E. COMBAS GUERRA Editor of El, MUNDO Juano Hernandez, the excellent Puerto Rican actor repeatedly acclaimed by Broadway audiences and critics, has just been hired by the great film company Metro Goldwyns Meyer. We are completely sure that this news will please all Puerto Ricrf, as another humble son of this also humble Caribbean Island, makes his way to fame and achieves quick access to the most popular entertainment, as is the cinema. Juano Hernandez. - as José Ferrer,- stampr* has made it known with true pride that he *is Puerto Rican. Ferrer has already triumphed in Hollywood, masterfully embodying the role of the Dauphin in the film Joan of Arc, starring the beautiful and famous Ingrid Bergman. And now Juano Hernandez is coming to Hollywood to play one of the main roles in WilHam Faulkner's "Intruder in the Dust". It was "i dla 30 de en*ro, qu* * *] public opportunity to listen to the noted actor by Radio-El Mundo, by whose microphones so maglstralmente Interpreted the role of old Cabot, of the work "The Greed under the Elms", of Eugene O'Neill. The following day he left for New York City, where he had an interview with the author Faulkner. His first and only radio performance in Puerto Rico was received with such enthusiasm that 1* station began hearing on missing plane carrying 29 Puerto Rican passengers and lost between Miami and San Juan CORAL GARLES, Blorlda, February 18,-(PU).- A federal hearing began today on the strange disappearance of an unrouted passenger plane flying between Puerto Rico and Miami, marking the first time the Civil Aeronautics Authority has investigated an accident in which a plane has completely disappeared without leaving evidence to help the investigation. The plane, a DC-3, with between 25 and 29 Puerto Rican passengers and a crew of three Americans, between San Juan and Miami on the night of December 28. The only testimony offered today that could have anything to do with the cause of the accident was that the pilot took off from San Juan knowing that his propellers were not working properly. Frank C. Apdrews, the CAB's air safety inspector, said his investigation in San Juan had revealed that the plane had experienced difficulties on a flight from Miami to San Juan on the night of the accident. *on page 14. Col. 8"
S" ir ■ ' . H Jh Bk e 1 - W lilililí ; ■■V"'' j '-i;?'-? JUANO HERNANDEZ WEMR, at the request of countless people who had no occasion to hear him, and of ntrss who wished to hear him again, offered three dins later the recordings that had been made of "Va Codicia bajo los Olmos". Juano Hernandez underwent his first test in front of the cameras in New York City, and a few days later received word from Hollywood that he was to leave immediately for New York City for the final tests. And shortly after arriving in the Mecca of cinematography, and after holding interviews with some of the main officials of the Metro, he was offered an advantageous contract, which he accepted immediately. In a letter received by this newspaper, Juano is rightfully jubilant, and says he is very grateful to the gentleman (Cont. on Page 14.- Coi. 7) Certain Cars Exempted from Taxation * Those Used as Working Instruments by their Owners The Legislative Commission on Transportation and Drivers has recommended that legislation be approved so that insured public vehicles that are working instruments of their owners be exempted from the payment of lien taxes. The Commission's recommendations to the Governor and the presidents of the House and Senate are as follows: "That a study and investigation of the passenger transportation service in the Río Piedras area be carried out, including the operation of the Transportation Authority, independent buses and motor vehicles with capacity for ten passengers or less, in said areas. Concessions * Trucks "Recommends legislation to amend Act 79 to expand the powers of the Commissioner of Labor to make special concessions to certain classes of trucks. "That the requirement to the effect that all vehicles (Cont. at p. 14. - Col. 7) be eliminated .
. n*., I ■ - --fllMl- a. - BF JM *^3'"fe * fri t'fU y g Y k I iSKT 51 iíi I gV \ I bJO I 'uSl áu ■ -"/I R i KJI I HMnbM I EJ ■■ 1 M ta r --^*MaKS9SSBHMM4|KqM^- B VI . .!■
Next Monday, U.S. Marine Corps aviation will begin on the island the largest demonstrations it has already conducted since the end of the last world war. Aircraft and military personnel have already arrived in Puerto Rico which will have
jet propulsion on the runway of the airport from which they took off for their flight over the island. In the center photo, do* of said* *p*r*to* perform maneuvers at Roosevelt Roads, above car- " " ga aircraft lined* up* on the ground. On the right, the* pilots* directing the* ope
1m operations, and in preparation* for this* one, jet-propelled planes flew over 1* Isl*. for the first time yesterday. Of these maneuvers, various aspects are shown in the photographs above- - rlorea A 1* extreme left, in both* engravings, the* apparatus* do
HHIHBBMBBBHMkwí- ' ■ 'i ¿ ' racione*, from Left * right: Captain Jame* L. Whitaker, First . Lieutenant John McManus, Major Loren O. Everton and Colonel E. Y Montgomery (Photographs from THE WORLD).
House Requests Data on Several Laws
Refer to Unappropriated Funds Legislature Commends Governor Muñoz. Recess for Wednesday Yesterday, the news published by EL MUNDO had repercussions in the House of Representatives regarding the appropriations contained in numerous laws that have not been entered into the Island Audit books. The laws authorizing the aforementioned appropriations, which total more than $13.000,000- were passed between the years 1940, 1947 and 1948 ' Shortly after the House met at 10 a.m., under the chairmanship of Speaker Ernesto Ramos Antoninl, Representative* Alfonso Román García read the information published by w EL MUNDO in Cáa mara, and requested that through the Secretary of the House, the Auditor of Puerto Rico be asked for a list of the appropriations that have not been entered into the books, as well as the works that have not been executed, and the municipalities to which they correspond. Mr. Román García said that although the newspaper indicated that the unused funds were going to be used in a highway plan, to be executed with combined funds from the Federal Government, he considered that more important than the highway problem was the problem of public instruction, and that he knew that in the unexecuted projects, whose allocations have not been included in the Auditor's books, there are many schools and classrooms. Labor of Orientation B Mr. Román García added that his petition also had the purpose of orienting Jos. legislators, so that they would know the funds they could count on for the execution of their projects. In connection with the same matter, Representative José Mimoso Respaldo made another request. He requested that the Auditor be asked for a statement of all the Revenues during the years 1946, 1947 and 1948, the total expenditures of the Government during the years mentioned, and the total appropriations made by laws during the same yearsa> Mr. Mimoso Respaldo expressed that he has been under the impression that the Revenues of the Government in the last few years have been sufficient to execute all the laws approved. On motion of Representative Augusto Valentín, the House agreed to send a message of greetings to the people of Cuba. The message will be contained in a resolution to be carried by the Mayagüez-Indian baseball team, which will represent Puerto Rico in the upcoming sports competition to be held in Havana. The House also agreed to address a message of greetings to Governor Luis Muñoz Marín, who was celebrating his birthday yesterday. The House adjourned at a quarter to one in the afternoon, to resume its work next Wednesday, when the island's Chief Executive is expected to appear to read his message, which has been awaited since last Monday, when the 17th Legislative Assembly was inaugurated. The Senate held a brief session yesterday, during which two bills were filed. A motion by Senator Luis Alfredo Colón was approved, so that a telegram be sent to the Governor by the Secretary, congratulating him on his birthday celebration, i The bills filed were one, number 111, to validate the actions of the President of the House and the Senate in appointing, as they appointed, the employees of both legislative bodies. ■ A request of the House of Representatives was approved so that (Cont. to P. 14. - Col. 7).
Air Maneuvers in Puerto Rico
Mayagüez Gave a Warm Reception to its Team
'^k íí £ ■ w IRWy 4 4 W V * - .*?■ Kh. ■ftsiéw ■ 1 m I i a sBL-.-, xmI I
Ht-WtWWW:- * wweee Mayagiiez Indians manager and shortstop Artle Wilson is carried on the shoulders of enthusiastic Mayagüezana fans at Sixto Escobar Park after his team was proclaimed Insular professional baseball champion by virtue of its victory over the* Cangreos.
torio over the Cangrejeros de Santurce, 6-3, in the game celebrated last night. A few days later, the same scene was repeated with Wilson and other* Players, upon the arrival of the* Indio* to Msyagüez (Photo by El Mundo, by Casenave).
Nourse Opines Situation Is One Of Optimism No Depression Unless Public Is Dominated By Hysteria By Louis CASSELS WASHINGTON, Feb. 18 <PU> -Dr. Edwin G. Nourse, President Truman's chief economic adviser, said today that the Nation has entered a healthy "period of disinflation," which will not lead to a depression unless the public is dominated by "hysteria." Dr. Nourse discussed Isa economic outlook with President Truman and later told reporters that he shares the President's optimism, but disagrees strongly with the way he phrases it. The Chief Executive told a press conference yesterday that recent price declines indicate that the waters are returning to level. something everyone has been waiting for. But Nourse, chairman of Mr. Truman's Council of Economic Advisers, said he preferred to "stay away from the word leveling." "It gives a lot of people the impression that prices are going to remain reasonably stable at the current level," he said. "Instead of a stable situation, I think we should expect a confused situation, of ups and downs in prices." Depression Is Far Away When prices stabilize, he said, he expects it to be a lower level than the present, but still higher than the prewar level. Noyrse explained that he chose the term "disinflation" for the present situation because he believes that inflationary forces are weakening, but the pals are not yet close to "deflation," or the onset of depression. He warned, however, that if the public is swayed by "hysteria," the recent price adjustments may continue into depression. (Cont. to p. 14. - Col. 8)
People in Masses Took to the Streets . To Cheer Island Baseball Champions - Fiesta Days Proclaimed
Jet Propulsion Planes Flew Here For The First Time Yesterday For the first time in Puerto Rico, jet propulsion planes flew over the island during a few short maneuvers. Commander General Field Harris of the Marine Corps Aviation arrived on Thursday to conduct maneuvers in which some 200 fighter planes and about 3,000 men will participate. During a press conference yesterday, he said he personally knew our compatriot, General Pedro A. del Valle, with whom he fought during World War II on the Pacific front. General Del Valle retired a little over a year ago and is now president of the Bell Telegraph and Telephone Company in Egypt. Beginning next Monday until March 19, the Marine Corps Aviation will make in Puerto Rico the largest demonstrations it has made since the end of the last world conflict. Jet Propulsion By the end of next week there will be at Roosevelt Roads, Ensenada, a group of 12 jet-propelled aircraft. These aircraft *are so small that they give the impression of "toys". However, they play a role of tremendous importance in war aviation. They have no propeller and are operated by one man each. The aircraft can carry no more than one. They make a deafening noise and reach a speed of over 500 miles per hour, thus enabling the pilot to get away quickly after hitting the target. Two of these aircraft maneuvered yesterday at Roosevelt Roads, du(Cont. on Page 14.- Co
MAYAGUEZ, February 18. - (By Salvador E. Pnbon). - Mayagüez is today the happiest city in the Universe, after the professional baseball championship won by its representative Indians last night. The Mayor of the city, Mr. Baudilio Vega Berrios, issued an official proclamation, declaring a day of celebration since the last out was given last night at 10:17 a.m. until the time the champion team leaves for Cuba tomorrow (today), at 10:00 a.m. Tonight the leader Artie Wilson was to be installed as Mayor in the Assembly Hall of the Municipality; Alonso Perry, another of the heroes in the triumph of the Indians, was to be installed as President of the Municipal Assembly and other ballplayers completed the rest of the Assembly. May agites lived a* try hour of triumph. When the last out was given at Sixto Escobar Park, the siren* of the Parque de Bombas noisily split the air, and immediately some 15,000 people gathered at the Pia■a de Colón, drunk* with happiness, including old people and children who embraced each other and cried for joy, without hardly knowing each other. From all the neighborhoods of the Sultana del Oeste came out numerous fanatics with flaming jachos, pretending through the streets that they were fishing for crabs. We noticed a considerable number of fanatics barefoot and with their shoes around their necks, and others with their hair freshly cut to the tape, as if they had paid promises. It was a real apotheosis, resembling a real New Year's Day, with people discharging revolvers into the air, blowing whistles, shouting, while all the commercial establishments and homes kept their lights on. Hundreds and hundreds of fans boarded cars in Mayagüez to welcome the ballplayers in Aguadilla and accompany them the rest of the way. At the same time, Aguadilla fans congregated in the main streets to give their just recognition to the winning team. As they passed through Aguada, the pelote(Cont. on Page 34.-- Coi. S> 1
GsIvm Maturana, Editor of EL MUNDO The fact that allocations amounting to thirteen million dollars have not been brought to the books of the Auditor does not affect the Economic Program of the Government, according to Dr. Rafael Picó, president of the Board of Plans, yesterday. Dr. Picó believes that it is only an accounting operation carried out by the Auditor, and a temporary measure taken for that purpose. The President of the Planning Board stated that all the works approved in the Government Program will be carried out, but that, undoubtedly, all the money allocated will not be spent between now and June 30. He added that for this reason, the Auditor is separating the allocations from those works that, although approved, will be carried out in future years in order to, in an accounting operation, not close its books with deficits. He cited as an example the $8,000,000 bond issue approved by the Legislature, which has not yet been done. "At the time it is done," - said Dr. Picó, - "the Auditor will be able to carry on his books the appropriations of the nhras for* which said issue was approved. TA Must Reimburse Another example given by the Chairman of the Plan Board was that of the Land Authority, which must reimburse the General Fund the sum of four million dollars (Cont. at p. 14. - Col. 7).