* * * 4 ' * THE DAILY M&NDO TOMORROW e " _ , á
- WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. BOY: Partial to occasinnal- -' meato cloudy during light showers dioporooo. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: High, 80 degrees; low, 74 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level. at 4:80 p.m., . 18.17 inches of mercury.
NEW TOBE, May 8. (PU) - In the afternoon today "e Reported laa "lgul "ntra temperatures: Chicago, 80 deg."; Miami. 84: Wáshlngton. 87, and Nuera York. 80, its highest temperature this year. Tomorrow's forecast for New York and neighboring eludadee": partly cloudy, scattered" rain, highest temperature, between 80 and M. Moderate southwesterly winds.
■dio XXX
FIVE CENTS
Entered as second class matter, Post Office. San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -SATURDAY, MAY 7, 1949
NUMBER 13658
U.S.- Denies Having Secret Alliance
With the U.S.-Answers at U.N.O. To Andrei Gromyko Who Alleged Existence In Spain of 70 Bases For Attacking the Soviet, By BRUCFW? MUNN 'LAKE SUCCESS, New York, May 6. (FU) - The United States today denied the allegation that it has a secret military alliance with Franco's Sparta, and U.S. delegate Roy Atherton said the United States did not want Sparta to join the North Atlantic Alliance, nor did it want to admit Generalissimo Franco's regime to the group of Marshall Plan recipient nations, nor to the Marshall Plan family. Marshall Plan, nor in the United Nations family. Atherton rejected before the. Atherton rejected before the Political Committee of the General Assembly the statements of the Deputy Foreign Minister of Ruala, Androl Gromyko, alleging that the United States had seventy air rafts in Eapafta for a war against Ruala and that Washington and London had sent large quantities of armaments to Spain. In view of all this, is there any reason to be surprised that so many fools are asking for a secret military agreement between the United States and the Sword of Franco?" Atherton denied it: '*Notwithstanding the assertions to the contrary, we do not have* a military aMansa, with Sparta, no, homo" militarily aided Sparta not maintained" military missions in Sparta We have not tvoroddo the Intruder of Sparta in the United Nations or in "1 trope of recipient nations" of the Marshall Plan or signatories to the North Atlantic Defense Pact. Esperta's participation in such cooperative projects "or something else must be determined by" the participants, and not by the United States alone." Atherton announced that the United States would vote against a Polish resolution to impose an arms embargo and make diplomatic relations with Franco's Sparta more difficult. He said he also did not support the move to allow the return to Sparta of ambassadors from UN member nations, favoring Spartan participation in specialized UN agencies. Meanwhile, the United States and six other nations formally introduced a resolution to make Israel the ninth member of the United Nations, ignoring the opposition of the Arab states. Warren R. Austin, American permanent delegate to the organization, in advocating a quick vote on the Israeli application, said that the new state had solemnly pledged itself to comply with the provisions of the United Nations Charter, and that his Government believed it would be a valuable member of the United Nations and should therefore be admitted to the organization. The Political Committee, which is considering the request of the Jewish Government, also received another Lebanese proposal, to postpone action until the fall. After Aubrey S. Eban, Israel's representative to the U.N., had been questioned for two days by the Committee, the American delegation agreed to support an Australian proposal to admit the Israeli state without further domofe ra.
Spaniards - Veterans Return. Excess Serra Warns Veterans Could Lose Rights Payments for Study Costs By RürTcOIFrIVERA {Editor of EL MUNDO) i Any veteran who has received excessive payments for study subsistence" should return them as soon as possible to the Veterans Administration, according to Dr. Jaime Serra Chavarry, director of the federal veterans' agency, Dr. Serra said. Dr. Serra Chavarry revealed that "it is practically impossible to prevent that in some occasions checks are improperly issued to student veterans," but that his agency "is making a great effort to eliminate the payment of ex- ' ceslvos. " 1 According to our informantn, federal law "requires that all- . any overpayment received by ve- . Uranos student," has to be . promptly returned to 4a Veteran's Admlnls- . tradon," - Otherwise, the ex-combatant - (Continued on page 18, col. 8) i , i AV Will Reduce Its Staff I - July First .Agency Prepares 1 To Adjust Expenditures* ' ' To Thoroughly" Available 6,-<PU). * -The Veteran's Administration" ' announced today that it envl">A' avmbx of . tuspenalon of emploe', 30 days in advance, to 8,000 employees, ¡ approved for the new fiscal arto [ which begins July 1, 1 Veteran's Administration * Jeta, Carl R. Gray, Jr., said * that the action will force the closure of * 43 small VA offices in 23 states, but that * veterans' hospitals and medical services will not be affected. * The employment suspensions will be made on a national basis. In a letter to the । members" of Congress Iñformán- ( dolos da la Imminente arción, Gray . says every effort will be made to J maintain essential services, . ■ in the highest degree, s Urges A Pruning -; Meanwhile, Senator Harry F. - Byrd, D-Virginia, leader of the Senate economic bloc, urged Congress to prune at least $4,000,000,000,000 from President Tru- . man's . budget estimate. Otherwise, he added, the Gov- . . | blerno will face * the alternai 1 tlva of having to raise । contributions, or to operate with I deficit. ... ¡ He repeated earlier statements of his that the J Government is now walking toward ün ti $3,400,000,000,tW in fiscal arto n 1 ri" 1930. and that this deficit may rise to $6,500,000,000 in Jd fiscal year 1981. He said that in i "so no ree fluction in current Federal Revenues " was included. h Gray said that he is compelled to order suspensions of emt plement in the Ve- ¿ terans Administration at this time, in order . that the July 1 payroll not exceed riel money appropriated in the K bill recently passed by the Ca- mara, to administer its division i in the fiscal year 1950. *. House Reduce Appropriation -- President Truman requested the r sum of $5,654,162,000 for the Ad-"- minlstraclon of Veterans, but the 1 (Continued on page 18. col. 8).
The resolution was supported, in addition, by Canada, Guatemala, Haiti, Panama and Uruguay. The measure called on the United Nations General Assembly to decide that "Israel is a sovereign state which is a State party to the Charter (of the United Nations) and is willing to comply with the obligations contained in the Charter (of the United Nations) and is prepared to comply with those obligations". Eban was extensively opposed by the Arab delegates, arguing violently with Georges Hakim of Lebanon. In the case of the Holy Places, Hakim asked him if Israel was willing, "from now on", to respect the resolutions of the General Assembly. "Contrary to the Government of Lebanon." -Israel will not join a coalition for the purpose of forcibly combating a General Assembly resolution. Our government considers these resolutions as moral obligations," while Arab states have been demonstrating in recent months that they believe these resolutions can be accepted or rejected, depending on the expediency of the moment. Answering other questions (Continued on page 18, Col. 6) A
The photograph shows the Collins quadruplets - two 1 nlftoa and two girls* - who are snuggled comfortably in an Incubator at Lebanon Hospital in <"New York City. Sata oa the first photo quo i m lea taken of the boMa, born to the mlároo- i
gOMlrvI " V va Hx JIM He a .
lee. The photo on the right shows loa parents. Charles Collins, of S7 afio", a clerk in a ralee broker's office, and his wife. Ethel, of the same age, is happily rejoicing, with all the right that goes with the extraordinary event.
The View on Fanguito Was Borrascosa
? ''''J''' ■ nBm $
. señorea Enrique Gélgel Fqtonco, secretarlo of the Jutita de Planée; Rubén Ránchen, Jefe de te División de Ingeniería do te same Junta; A. Bandín del Mansa- . no, drowned of that entity; and the ► colonel César Cordero Dávila. Je-
Aspect of the presidency, during the "mouse held yesterday at the Mayor's Office of Kan Juan, to discuss whether or not to declare the El Fanguito neighborhood a "sona de-arrájMl". Delsqulerda to right, u-" a
The event turned out to be extremely stormy, and the public meeting was a great success. The event turned out to be extremely stormy, according to the information accompanying this engraving.
. . , .... .. - + r Morales Otero I En Pro Leche Se Pasterice Afirma se Protegeria Contra la Brnceloniii Público Areai" Urbanas , ■/ r " ■ ' 1 Fnr Lula Hernández Aqulno Editor of EL MUNDO In his recent scientific obr* ' Estudios de I* Infección de la Bru-. 1 cela in Puerto Rico, Dr. Pa- I blo Morales Otero, former director of ' the School of Tropical Medicine, < argues that brucetosls (fever , undulant or Malta fever) constitutes a public health problem púhll- , ea of considerable proportions, . and that each rila is becoming more ser-. 1 The ohr,a riel Dr. Morales Ote- ¡ ro. which is one of the most valuable , contributions to the subject of brucellosls in this hemisphere, was given to publicity just a few weeks ago, on the eve of leaving the directorship of the School of Tropical Medldna, which he held for many years, The former Director of 1a School of Medicine Trepida! The former Director of the School of Medicine Trepida! makes an approach ' gives a whole >1 problem of the brúcelosis in Puerto Rico after long researches of many years, ' arriving at a condueionea on the disease. of great importance. In summary, after a study of the situation, Dr. Morales Otero concludes that the control of brucellosis in Puerto Rico is not compulsory, but rather is carried out as a cooperative project of the U.S. Bureau of Animal Industry and the Department of Island Agriculture. The method in operation consists of segregation, slaughter of infected cattle and vaccination of calves. Dr. Morales Otero explains that there is no toy in Puerto Rico that makes the pasteurization of cow's milk compulsory; that public education has made clear the need for better pasteurized milk and that if all milk consumed were boiled or pasteurized, the danger of infection would be reduced to those groups living in areas with infected animals, but the majority of the population, living in rural areas, would be left unprotected. Dr. Moratos Otero points out that the compulsory pasteurization of milk in large herd centers is very costly because of the proteo- . । clon riel public of these and ntras en- ' fermedarie" that are transmitted by l meólo of to milk Infected. Dr. Morale" Otero says that very little work has been done to determine whether infected meat and other infected animal products, when ingested, are a serious health threat, or how practical control of these sources of danger can be carried out, as the statistics indicate that Puerto Rico has 316.835 head" of cattle; 375,761 pigs" and 61,500 cows, goats and sheep, with a production of 39,437,410 quarts of beef and 28,261,429 pounds of meat. Infection in sow cattle has not been proven. | Concludes that today constitutes the I (Continued on page 18. Col. 5),
r vnninn vrwmr vunirn* a/rot un, jr- *raiivn4iui""\ a uw was jub" lutein"/ Mayor Rincón Had to Intervene to Organize Discussion on Area Declaration in Arrabal Zone By R. Gálve" Maturana The Home Authority's petition to the Planning Board to have the El Fanguito area declared a slum area was hotly contested yesterday during the public hearing held by more than 800 residents in attendance. . .
In the stormy session held in the Municipality of San Juan, it was necessary to decree a recess in order to bring all those present, who loudly protested and interrupted the Director of the Homes Authority, César Cordero Dávila, during his statement. It was necessary the intervention of the Mayor of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón rio Gautier, to restore order, after a recess was decreed during which two members of the Local Government were in charge of placing the public in the ""lón rio aeilone"", outside the auditorium, deatlnario to the officials who were conducting the hearing. On the motion of the Mayoress, a commission of the residents of El Fanguito was appointed, composed of ten people, so that they would be the ones to make statements and ask questions to the other residents of the area. This oomtelon was composed of five comrlantea and five teBidents. Blondo this"; Angel V*. toz. José Sotomavor. Pedro Sotomayor. Abraham Pasosa. Rafael Menénriez, Rufino Ortiz, Urbano Rio". Pedro Martínez, Guillermo Ortiz and Eduardo Rio". In appointing "* this Committee, the Mayoress made "aher specifically qu* alia also figurarla romo miembro "de! organismo rio ri*f>nsa rio los Interesas de tos r""M "ntea en El Fanguito." Cordero Dávila Explains The Director of the Puerto Rico Homes Authority, César Cordero Dávila. explained the scope of the Authority's plans, in relation to the declaration of El Fanguito as a slum area, At a moment in which he was answering a question about the risk that the merchants of the area would have to run, when being transferred to Casarla Las Casas, the public shouted protesting and rioting in such a way, that it became impassible to continue with the hearing. To this question he answered *1 Mr. Corriera Dávila that if the Government of Puerto Rico had to sacrifice 206 merchants to provide adequate housing for 14,0Ó0 families, he would do so. He added that in the new area no "ventorrillo*" or "tiendariuchas" could be allowed, but that a commercial center would be enabled, Mayor Objeta To these manifestations of! "eflor Corriera Dávila objected the Mayor, mentioning that the merchants" of El Fanguito should be allowed to establish their businesses in Las Casa", as long as "- adopt a regulation in. Said the Mayoress that the problem of the merchant was the problem of all the residents of El Fanguito, who do their shopping on credit in the majority of the city (Continued on page 18, Col. 1).
Law Authorizes ¡ Using Laborers : Outside Working Hours । Would Issue, Permit. - Other Bills Signed The Governor signed yesterday and eon- 1 virged in laye" several bill." । > The list atgue: ' Senate Bill, Act ' 187. Gives powers to the ' Transportation Authority, to regulate the 1 operation of airports in , Port Rlqo. House Bill 897, act ' 180. Maintained the sum <te SHO.oon 1 for the appointment of legal dflcialea" for the judges of the Supreme Court. ! House Bill. 1028. act 190. Appropriating the sum of $15,000 for operating expenses of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the Department of the Interior. Senate Bill 378, Act 188. Amends the title and Section 1 of the "Act to authorize the Secretary of Labor to grant permission to employers to employ laborers overtime". This law does not make any change whatsoever in the "ritapoiiclone" of the law which it amends, but clears up doubts which existed as to cases in which laborers could not be employed outside the hours which constitute a legal day's work. The new law does not change any provision altering the wages to be paid for overtime work. Text of the Act The text of the Act is as follows: "Section 1.-The Commissioner of Labor is hereby authorized to grant permission to employers or owners of establishments to employ laborers or employees in those hours or hours during which the employment of women is prohibited by Act No. 73 of June 21, 1919, as amended, or in those hours during which the employment of women is prohibited by Act No. 73 of June 21, 1919, as amended, or shall be post-sleepant" as amended, provided that. In the judgment of the Commissioner, it is necessary, in order to enable the employer or owner to complete urgent work to be performed within the time specified in the factories, mills or any other factory, mills or any other place of work, to be performed within the time specified in the Act, or in any other place of work.Provided, however, that in no case shall any woman under the age of eighteen (18) years who is not pregnant be employed after ten o'clock at night and until sunrise in the morning, (Continued "on page 18, Col. 4) 1 Rains Offers Quadruplets Are Already Famous NEW YORJC~May 6 (Eipedal d "l New York Time")- Offers, gifts and other goodies, smpsssron to lysr Sara the Collins quadruplets. ¡sos good first Bronx citizens, with their mother, are doing wonderfully well at the end of their first day on ol libante hospital. The parents, tortor Chariot Collint and tu otpota. whose ancestry offers no other multiple births, retained the service of an attorney to consider leo ofortae, the main leo which onvuslvs one case, to be conotrutda for the family. Born Wednesday afternoon, at minute-and-a-half intervals between one and the other, the two boys and two girls weighed > {Continued on page 18, CoL ?>.
Caribbean Area Requests Assistance
Delegates* Want Truman Plan To Include In Government To Eliminate Far PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, May 6. (PU)- The U.S. President" ri" the Caribbean Rail Commission today completed three rounds of discussions with prominent government officials, including" President Truman. The Chairman of the U.S. delegation, Ward M. Canaday, reported to the United Press that the discussions had been very valuable. He added that he and his colleagues on the Commission have reason to hope that their lectures will help to stimulate practical economic development programs in the Carthage region. The delegation made the last of its visits to government leaders shortly after noon today when it met with John W. Snyder, Secretary of the Treasury. Revocation of Arbitration . Canaday disclosed that the commissioners discussed with Snyder the possibility of petitioning Congress to repeal the 15 per cent federal excise tax now levied on air and boat tickets between the United States and Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and other Caribbean points. The other three members of the Commission, former Puerto Rico Governor Jeaú" T: Pifiero, Governor William H. Hast i", Virgin Islands, and Dr. Rafael Picó, Director of the Board of the Government of Puerto Rico, accompanied Canariay. Canariay declined to repeat what Snyder had said about the problem of the arbitrio "obra boleto" ticket. But he indicated that the Secretary of the Treasury would consider any measure to suspend the excise tax, which could be taken to incur a deficit in the budget. With the prospect of Government spending next year exceeding $40.1 OOO/XAOOO, fiscal officials are reluctant to eliminate any source of revenue. Also involved is the expectation that "if the tax on airline tickets for travel to the Caribbean is eliminated, there will be strong arguments on all sides that it should be eliminated for other areas," In the past three days, the commissioners, in addition to seeing Snyder and President Truman, have held conferences with Secretary of Defense Louis A. Johnson; with Secretary of Defense Louis A. Johnson; with Secretary of State Johnsson and with President Truman; and with the President of the United States. Johnson; with the Secretary of the Interior, Jules A. Krug; with the Secretary of State, Dean G. Achesnn, and with other high Government officials. The commissioners intend to report to the next meeting of the four-power commission, to be held in Trinidad in June, on the discussions held at Washington. Transportation and communications problems in the Caribbean were discussed with Johnson and State Department officials. / Discussions with Krug were mainly concerned with the development of natural resources, hydroelectric power, development of tourist facilities and the like. The po"|hllidarie" ri" to increase trade between the Carii be countries and to increase the trade of that area with the rest of the world, was discussed" with Acheson and others. Carlhe as a Patron In their meeting with the President, the commissioners emphasized the important role the Commission could play in establishing the Caribbean rail region as a patron in the President's "number four item" program for economic development.
House To Ask House To Raise Island Education Allocation
'""" ' ■'"""" The Constituent Assembly of the German nMt" decided today to set up a temporary Government in West Germany, to serve until the election of a government of its own. The temporary Government "will be racogldo tonight in to Anamhlen Constituent ri e Bonn and begin it to function Immediately of "pués of to adoption of to to Consttludón by to Convention Con "tltuyente of Boon, on Sunday- . Accused Attacks Judge on Hearing His Sentence The Event *e Recorded San Sebastian. Police Had to Use Roten SAN (By A. Sagardto, Jr.) - The Judge of the San Sebastian Municipal Court, Lic. Eduardo Negrón Benítez. was assaulted by the accused Manuel Rivera Santiago, to whom the aforementioned official was sentenced to five months in jail in three cases of assault and battery. The unusual event took place this morning, producing among the public that at that moment was attending the court, a wave of indlstaadóm to such an extent that the public tried to attack the accused, prevented by the judge. l# Errata Municipal Court of San Sebastian never speaks registry, of a case like this, being the first time in the judicial history of this population qu" a defendant mounts "n anger and contempt of court, attacking the official who imparts justice. While Judge Negrón Benitez was imposing on the accused Manuel Riv "ra Santiago five tables of jail in three cases of assault and battery, the accused rose from his witness chair and lunged at the magistrate, who was on the bench, assaulting him with his fist. The action of the accused caused a great commotion in *1 court, where there was a large audience witnessing the case, and the police had to intervene. Agent Aurelio Gonzalez, who was there, made use of his baton, striking the defendant Rivera Santiago several times, to reduce him to obedience. The public also tried to attack Rivera Santiago, but the assaulted Judge, Lic. Ne- I grón Benitez, prevented him from being the object of aggression, - ■ There were four cases against the accused Manuel Rivera Santiago: three of them for crimes of assault and aggravated assault, committed against Mrs. Monserrate Morale" Pérez and the minors Edwin Pérez and Gonzalo Medina. The fourth case in which the defendant was acquitted was for disturbing the peace. Immediately after Judge Negrón Benitez handed down his sentence, the aggression of Manuel Rivera Santiago occurred. The event was immediately reported to the Aguadilla Prosecutor, who went to the town of San Sebastian to conduct an investigation of the facts and proceed to make the corresponding actions.
4K - will .i i i him- --> Senate Bill Sets $7 Million Appropriations and James P. Davís To Manage Parity With Poorer States By " WASHINGTON, May'rt (Special to The World) - The Department of the Interior and Resident Commissioner Antonio Parnés Isern, M.D., will request an increase in the allocation for Puerto Rico in the federal education aid bill approved by the Senate, when such measure is approved by the Senate.by the Senate, when such measure is considered in * the House, Fernós and Jomes P. Davís, director of the Education Division, told EL MUNDO today. Davís, director of the Territories Division. * The Senate last night passed the bill, which provides for the granting of $300,000,000 a year in grants to assist the State and Puerto Rico to pay for school, teacher, and other school supplies, by a vote of 58 to 14. As passed, the bill would provide no more than three percent of the total appropriation for the Territory, and would provide no more than three percent of the total appropriation for the Territory.r percent of the total allocation for the territories and possessions, a percentage which will be apportioned on the basis of population and the need of children between 5 and 17 years of age, Seven Million for the Tala. Of the nine million allocated to the territory, he estimated that Puerto Rico's share would amount to about three billion dollars a year. Originally, the bill had only two percent, but it was increased to three percent in the Senate Labor and Welfare Committee, Davis said he was "very pleased that the bill passed" and hoped the outlook for passage in the House would be good. "I would have liked," Davis said, "if they had not created specific limitations in the bill as far as Puerto Rico was concerned. I would have liked Puerto Rico to be treated on a parity with low-income states. He stated that he may be able to get any possible addition in the House, saying that "the Department of the Interior will support any grant from the Resident Commissioner aimed at achieving at least the level of the low-income states. Fernós said he was pleased that the Senate had approved the bill, and explained that he had done everything possible "to get the consent of an amendment, but evi. । dentemente no fue posible". He said that Puerto Rico spoke as two million dollars when the Senate Committee 1 increased the percent allocation to the territory, and that he was hopeful that something could be done in the House Education and Labor Committee. He said he was grateful for the cooperation of the Department of the Interior as expressed by Mr. Davis. I have always been able to count on his help. The final passage of the bill in the Senate was only after a large majority of Republicans and Democrats had defeated a series of spital Amendments. Do* of the amendments provoked furious* debate over the separation of church and state. The issue is expected to be the subject of even more furious debates in the House. In the meantime, it was recalled that during recent hearings before the House Labor Committee on the minimum wage bill, several members expressed the hope that they could do something to help Puerto Rico when an education bill came before them. Graham A. Barden, D-N.C., is expected to lead the committee battle for an increase in Puerto Rico's appropriation. Education Commissioner Mariano Villaronga, island teachers' groups and the Legislature have repeatedly asked for a larger appropriation for the island. In a resolution sent to the Legislature, they requested that the percentage be raised to new percent, which would result in the island being treated on near parity with the states. As you know, the teachers' petition, which emerged from all parts of the island, called for a higher percentage in the amount fixed for the territories, and would have resulted, if granted, in an additional sum for Puerto Rico of about twenty-five million dollars.
- If tEq; wB J