THE MBNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with some fairly scattered* showers* during the day, increasing cloudiness*iÍSLi to KS£2, roa noch *' ? AX JUAN, AYERi Maximum temperature, M degree*; minimum, W degree*. Barometric pressure at sea level, at* 4:M of 1a tardo, 29.96 in.* of mercury.
NEW YOBK, July 29. - (FU) - Bn l* late today m rogígtraron 1m riB entoa temperature*: Chicago, U¡ iml, 90; Nuov" York, 96; WáahlngIon, 94. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and dudadea voelnaa: pard*lly cloudy with deooargaa eláoirlc** and rain*available**. OontinaaA "nente warm, poro mono* humid taranto 1* tardo. Highest core* temperature* of 90. Ouaveo vivid and misty from* the west.
DAILY MORNING
YEAR XXX
®"ter<Ml a* "atten Poet Office, San Juan, P. B
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 30, 1949
NUMBER 13739 ONCO CENTAVOS
Speculation With Land Alleged
Fonfrías Criticizes Mayor Alvarez Says Puerto Nuevo Lacks Public Service Area For I. GALVEZMATURANA lUdMtor d* EL MUNDO Senator Ernesto Juan Fon- > frías yesterday accused the Long Construction Corporation of speculating on the price of land, sweetened as a commercial area! Now in Puerto Nuevo, he has given the merchants a three-month term to liquidate their businesses or move to the zone decreed by the Planning Board. Also, the Mayor of Rio Piedra, ■oAor Auguito P. Alvares, had some strong words against the Long Con "truotion and the Planning Board, regarding the public service problems affecting Puerto Nuevo, during the public hearing held yesterday regarding amendments to the Rio Piedras Bonus Plan. The hearing was held shortly after 9:30 a.m. to consider the proposed amendments before the Board. The Interim President, Mr. Carlos Pusstecqua, explained the purpose of the event and addressed brief words to the public regarding the amendments to be considered. Engineer Filiberto Garcia, head of the Zoning Board of Plans, using a map prepared for that purpose, explained in detail the amendments submitted to the Board, with repeated questions from interested persons. > When considering several amendments tending to a redesignation of the Puerto Nuevo Caterío, the speaker, Ernesto Juan Fonfrías, made remarks to the Long Construction Corporation. During his remarks, Senator Fonfrías said that the commercial problem of Puerto Nuevo was not solved with one or two shopping malls, and asked the Planning Board to make a thorough and careful review of the neighborhood on its commercial map before approving the new amendments submitted to the Rio Piedras Bonus Map. Fonfrlas added that the problem of 20,000 people living in the area of Puerto Nuevo and Caparra Heights is more serious than it seems, and that these people cannot depend on one or two shopping centers, who have to walk more than 500 meters to the shopping center to make a purchase of "one or two cents on the dollar. Fonfrlas said that Long Construction, taking advantage of the fact that it has given a three-month term to the small merchants of Puerto Nuevo to liquidate their businesses, is asking them for $12 and $15 per meter in the lots classified as commercial, which is why the merchants cannot acquire those lots. He accused Long Construction of having established a monopoly in Caparra Heights "by ceding to some friends the Commercial Center of said urbanization, which commercial center only sells cash, and closes at six o'clock in the afternoon, leaving the neighbors from that time on with no place to buy an aspirin if necessary, after that hour," Senator Fonfrlas requested that the commercial lots of Caparra Height also be reclaimed, on this occasion. The Board does not have power Interrupted *1 Senator Fonídai Jí" S-T* 1 ** 0 mlem. bro of the Board of Ptene", to explain to him that the Board does not have power over the facts denounced. Mr. Iglesias reported that the Board cannot intervene in the price that Mr. Long charges for his land nor in the operations he carries out for the operation of the Shopping Center. This, said Mr. Iglesias, is, in any case, a matter for other government agendas. Fonfrlas that he was defending those 20,000 people and helping them to solve some problems that might not be on the maps but were a latent reality in Puerto N"® v " F Caparra Height . ® aafl ® r ¿"ledas informed that Pla " M - "* ún defended it also to the small ones, because that was the policy of the entity, to tone tuaL** profran,a da Government ac¿Why there is no Beneficencia? Participating in the controversy, the Mayor of Río Piedras, Mr. Augusto P. Alvarez, requested the floor from the President to ask "a humble question". I Mayor Alvarez said: What action* has the Board of Piafo nes taken regarding land for public services? r At present, those 20,000 people cannot be offered services for charity, schools, schools, schools, etc., because there is not a single site assigned in the plans for those purposes, he said. He added that he wrote to the Jante months ago and has not received a reply (see page 16, Col. 6).
Bill Would Restore Civil Rights To Those Serving Sentences
Géigel Polanco Prepares Bill - Restored Civil and Political Rights to Twelve Individuals - - - - ♦ - -
By Juan Martines Chape! Editor of EL MUNDO The life sentence that would be imposed on any person who has served a sentence for a felony, will end in Puerto Rico, if a bill that the Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco, has in preparation becomes law. Yesterday, Acting Governor Géigel Polanco reinstated in their civil and political rights twelve persons who were convicted* by the courts and served the sentences imposed on them. Those convicted of felonies lose their civil and political rights in perpetuity. That means that they cannot legally exercise the right to vote; they cannot enter into contracts; they cannot marry; and they are civilly dead to the indispensable* acts of life. The only remedy is executive grace restoring to them the rights they lost. The* Beneficiary* The twelve persons* who were reborn-; ron to civil and political life yesterday are: Tito Presclllano Torres Mercado, Fulgencio Aldarondo, Jose Afanador Maestre, Justo Hernandez Cardona, Heriberto Torres Roman; Blas Diaz Rodriguez, Casimiro Rodriguez Santos, Alberto Rodriguez Diaz, Emilio Melendez Rivera, Angel Santiago Robert, Maximino Garay.
■r ' ' ': ii'Jlwa Jk'" í■ f? * Ledo, Vicente Géigel Polanco Pérez and Anselmo Nieves Sánchez, "These people, - said llcendado Géigel Polanco, - "asked to have their civil and political rights restored; but there are, many* others who being in Equal conditions, have not made any request and live probably violating the law without realizing it." "It is my opinion," continued the Attorney General and Acting Governor, "that the socle(Cont, on page 16, Col. 5)
Preparations Accelerate to Take Advantage of Federal Home Plan Allocation
An Explosion Shook Pellejas-Vivi Tunnel Discharge Set Off 6 Loads of Dynamite." There were no casualties Sel* charges of dynamite exploded in the PeUgjas-Viví tunnel, which is being built by the Puerto Rico River Springs Authority in Adjuntas, when an electrical discharge fell at the tunnel's exit mouth, which. commanded one of Jos transformers. Fortunately, according to the River Springs Authority, Guillermo Navarro Fuen, tes, the workers who were working in the tunnel had left the tunnel a moment earlier to proceed to detonate the dynamite placed in the tunnel. The River Source Authority yesterday issued the following statement in connection with this event: "On Wednesday, July 27, at 1:30 o'clock in the afternoon the dynamite charges inside the Pellejas-Vivi tunnel were completed, and the brigade left the tunnel to make the electrical connection and detonate the dynamite. It did not explode "The switch was closed and, as a result, the dynamite did not explode. While a* investigating outside the tunnel the* reason* for this abnormality, there was an indication of an approaching thunderstorm, and instructions were given that no one was to enter the tunnel. "At 2:40 o'clock in the afternoon, an electrical discharge occurred in the vicinity of the tunnel exit mouth, which burned out one of the* transformers. Simultaneously, an explosion occurred inside the tunnel. 6 Loads explode ''After passing the disturbance at. . mosférlco, the Superintendent of Construction, Engineer Javier Cuevas Benitez, penetrated inside the tunnel to investigate what happened and found that six of the* load* speak (Continued on page 16, Col. 4)
Urgent Salary Increase Believed Urgent AFacultadUPR Explains It Motivated Student Tuition Increase Expressing that the most urgent of all* necessary modifications in the University's budget structure has "been the establishment of a reasonable* salary scale* for the university faculty, the UPR explains the increase in tuition* fees for *1 upcoming university semester. The eomunloado issued yesterday by Ta University of Puerto Rico reads as "igue. "The Legislature of Puerto Rico, in its last ordinary session, was unable to meet the* requests for an increase for the university expansion program due to sui other multiple demands on the public* services* and the reduction in the island's Income*. "The University is forced to raise the additional funds necessary to meet its obligations by increasing the only* source* of income subject to its jurisdiction, while reducing operating expenses as much as possible. The University Board and the Superior Council of Education agreed upon an increase of ten dollars in the semester stipend of all regular students and an increase of one dollar per credit in the case of students who do not follow a complete program of study. "It is hereby made known that all* scholarship students* of the University of Puerto Rico or those exempted* from the payment of tuition due to the brilliance of their academic work or to reasons* of poverty, are not affected* by this provision. "The most urgent of all* necessary* modifications* in the budget structure of the University has*been the establishment, for the next fiscal year, of a reasonable* salary scale*for the university faculty. Within that scale dls(Contlnued on page 16, Col. 4)
The Treasury Department is studying the current Private Corporations Law, "with a view to redoing it and drafting a new statute," according to the Acting Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Francisco de Je "ú*. According to the Acting Treasurer, the aforementioned law should be amended, since "it is deficient and inadequate," having been found that "many of its provisions conflict with each other. VMM* Deficient and Inadequate Said Mr. De Je "ús: "The Corporations Law governing Puerto Rico dates from 1911 and although it was amended "u*tanclally in 1916, we believe the same to be deficient and Inadequate, having found that many* of its* provisions confllict one*with*the*other*." The Treasurer of Puerto Rico has entrusted the task of studying and preparing a new corporation law to Alvaro Ortlz, a member of the Legal Division of the Treasury Department, reported the Acting Treasurer, who said that "it will be a principal objective in the drafting of the new statute to make it conform as closely as possible to the Uniform Business Corporation Act, in force in many states* of the U.S.A. (Cont> on page 16, Col. 4).
er w ;o says
a w s 0 ü * mb Be JmI M I f Affifi ■h J| y I ■ ' L, An aspect of the public hearing held yesterday before the Public Ser- Juan Síes Córale* (second and third, from right to l*qulerda). vice Commission, in an effort to avert the strike with which they have amen*- expressed the* reason* for the chauffeur protest in *their character as presl- , "ado the chauffeurs. Seated, in front, were Mr. Arturo Quiñones and dente and counselor, respectively, of the strike committee.
The officials of the public housing agencies of Puerto Rico are awaiting the visit of Governor Luis Mufioz Marin to discuss with him the islanders' participation in the large public housing program recently approved by Congress, which received the approval of President Harry S. Truman, EL MUNDO has received a letter from the President of the United States. Truman, EL MUNDO received exclusive information that Messrs. Césu Cordero Dávlla, director of the Insular Homes Authority; Cario: Clausell, director of the Autoridat Municipal do Hogares do San Juan and Ernesto Juan Fonfrlas, chairman of the Board of Directors of the latter agency; -'miembro do 1" Junta do Comisione do de la A. I. H" were to meet for this purpose, possibly the day after the Governor's arrival or whenever he deemed it necessary, to discuss the matter as a whole. Governor Informed It is known that on the occasion of the twenty-first day discharge from the national capitol, the Governor of Puert< { { Rico has been apprised of the extensive housing program approved, which will benefit * PuertRico with approximately $80,000,000. States and territories will be funded according to their needs, which must be demonstrated by local housing agency officials. Strong Blco Clamors for $5,009 1 Puerto Rico is clamoring for no more than 36,000 housing units to efficiently and timely combat the problem of homelessness and housing outside of the lila* n "r' ma* in the lila. It is known that "efior Céoar Cor doro Dávlla, director of the Island Homes Authority, and one of the figures who has fought the hardest for an efficient housing program* recently wrote to Soflor Ra> mond Foloy, administrator of the Homes Agency, explaining " : Puerto Rico's problem in great detail. In that letter Mr. Corder pointed out to Mr. Foley that the number of homes on the island can be measured by the following facts: First, of the 400,000 families living on the island, some 94,000 live in slums. Second: that 3 out of every 4 families living in urban and rural areas, not in slums, live in low standard houses; and third: that the population increase in slum areas has reached the alarming figure of 2,000 per year. Finally, Mr. Cordoro is pu "o to Mr. Foley that if Puerto Rico's housing problem is to be dealt with on a basis of need, our island must receive, as a fair allocation, 35,000 units. On the other hand, if the matter is to be dealt with on a basis of need, Puerto Rico should receive, as a fair allocation, no less than $75,000,000. Muflo" Dtoeutió Progaéam On his recent visit to Washington, the Governor discussed with island officials Rafael Rut caglia and Donald Bonnlwoll, the possibility of funding a program of independent units for low-income families, signed by L. D. Long. The program, as announced, will consist of 35,000 units. The Governor announced to the senators that Mr. Long had submitted a proposal. The Governor was relying on the Congregation's homes program, which allocates money for this kind of construction. Also, the Governor was confident that Puerto Rico would receive 35,000 dollars for public housing, to be operated by government agencies, and that he was expecting the return of the Treasurer today The Acting Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Francisco de Jesus, told the press that he was expecting the arrival of the Treasurer, Sol Luis Descartes, today. Descartes had informed De Jesus that he would be back in San Juan from Friday to Saturday of the week ending tomorrow, and he expects, since he has not prayed for any contrary assembly, that he will return during the course of today. Treasurer Descarteo Podbta said he will return to his work at the Treasury Department next Monday.
Popular" Governor Muño" is received by Governor Muño" ■ w ; \E'* '* - ta 4" a t ■ v ■VA,':. 5'"...'■'.'i - - Governor Muflo* Marín was received by Cardinal Francia Spellman, at his residence in New York, where the Chief of the Island Executive was the object of a ngaaajo by the prelate.
Ship on Which Executive Arrives Is Expected Monday at 7 A.M. M. There will be loudspeakers so that he can speak to the public from the ship, at Isla Grande Pier. The Popular Party has taken charge of the preparation, cloning and organization of the reception that will be given to Governor Luis Mufioz Marín upon his arrival in Puerto Rico, on the morning of Monday, August 1, i ■ - -■!
It was reported that "in view of the demands of large groups of people from different towns, who have expressed their decision to come to San Juan to welcome Mr. Mufioz Marín and his family", the leadership of the Popular Party thought it convenient to take some organizational measures to avoid confusion. The ship in which the Governor will arrive will dock at Isla Grande, near the airport. Around the site where the ship will dock there will be a reception area, where the different commissions of the Island will have access. There will be loudspeakers* loudspeakers* will be placed in different places, so that the Governor's speech can be heard by all those gathered there, without the need for crowding. Sufficient parking space has been provided for automobiles. This will be properly "ephalted for the convenience of the drivers. Entry to the ship will be limited to the* persons composing the reception committee. It is expected that "efior Mufioz Marin will address the public from the ship. (Continued on page 16, Col. 4)
Elderly Indigent Receives Insurance $10,000 Son She Didn't Know About For Last 18 Years, Ixs Left This Fortune CAGUAS. (By Andres Martinez Garete, correspondent)-Etanlslá Ca-1 illlás Viera, a 70-year-old woman who lost her $7.50 welfare grant from the Public Welfare Bureau, was deeply moved *1 she received $3,000 as part of the $10,000 insurance left to her by her late son, merchant seaman Guadalupe Cruz Viera. E "1he lost his life in uh accident he suffered on a ship in the* short* Venezuela. Nothing was known, for one* 18 afio*. the old mother, "obre the whereabouts of his son. In the letter of information which she received with her first $2,000, she was informed that her son had suffered a severe blow to the chest and head while working on a ship in the coasts (Cont. on page 16. Coi. 4).
Drivers' Commission Holds Interview With CSP Members
The drivers and owners of the public busses* who* are protesting against the* measure* recently adopted* by the Public Service Commission, stated yesterday that they will remain firm* in their decision to go on strike on the date set, if through the* lobbying they have been carrying out they do not achieve a favorable solution to the problem* created. A commission composed of Pablo M. Villafalíe, Manuel Mojica Rosa, Angel Amado Peroira, David Alvares, Angel González, Salvador Lanzar, Ricardo Canalea, Enrique Quifiones Escobar, Francisco Nieves. Dionisio García Caballero, and chaired by Arturo Quiñones, visited the Commission yesterday morning. She was accompanied, in an advisory capacity, by Mr. Juan Sáez Córale*. lío Han Cumplido El preaidente de la Comisión de Servicio Público, licenciado Jorge V. Toledo, and the commissioner, Mr. Román Días Collazo, attended to the drivers' commission, who presented a written petition which was presented to them by Mr. Juan Sáez Córale*.
They brought a written petition which reads in part as follows: "We, the drivers and owners of public cars, gave our endorsement and support to the present Government, trusting in the promise of justice that was made to us. We consider that those promises have not been fulfilled, and what is more, we are still being trampled upon and followed, in a manner which obliges us to manifest our most energetic protest." "Hoping that justice will not be done, we request the following from this Commission: By Legislative Mandate First, that the order which does not prohibit travel in the metropolitan area be rescinded, and allow us to continue to work as we did before this order; Second, that the Public Service Commission join in our demand to the Governor, to rescind 1* Act 360 of 1949, until such time as he allows the drivers and owners of public cars to express our views on this particular issue." To the first request eon(Cont on page 16, Col. 1)
Berlin Air Supply Finished!
Anglo-American Force Aircraft Group Operating For 13 Months Has 70 Killed By John J. McDermott BERLIN, July 29,-(PU),- The Western allies today ordered the termination of the historic air supply of Berlin, but issued a warning that they were retaining a permanent nucleus of the world's largest peacetime air operation - in case they had to resume it. I Technically, the air supply । which defeated the Soviet blockade of Berlin at a cost of mi-' llions of dollars and 70 Anglo-American lives will enter its final phases on August 1 and disappear entirely within another 120 days. But, in reality, half of the North American transport planes now supplying Berlin and a* provisional force of British planes will be kept on standby in case the Russians set up another blockade. The 57,000 men of the aviation of three nations who saw 70 of their comrades go down in flames while supplying Berlin, welcomed the announcement that the air supply was about to end, but the announcement solemnly added: "A small force of American and British Royal Air Force aircraft will be kept on hand in Germany, and each air force will retain sufficient facilities to ensure that the supply can, if necessary, be resumed at any time and soon be raised to its full strength. Ix>s aircraft and aviation personnel retained in Germany will continue to make flights in mi "¡on|f" "d* routine" and training. Aviation experts pointed to a recent statement by the Minister d* Foreign Affairs of "n he lied that airVeiabaiticltnlent would be suspended when "o had built up in Berlin existence* "uilciehte* for five mew*. They also pointed out that *1 the 120-day air supply deamantelamlment plan was* "put in reoerv"", the Allied" oc(dientals would have a month's head start to bring it back to full efficiency before the stockpile ran out in Berlin. Lessons were learned from high-ranking generals down to the soldiers working the airstrips, and American pilots paid tribute to "the lessons we have learned" from the vast task of supplying the blockaded Berlin by air. Maj. Gen. William H. Tumor, commander of the joint Anglo-American operation that supplied Berlin for 13 months, said, "We will never forget those lessons." Major General Laurence S. Ruter, of the Military Air Transport Service, disclosed that the bulk of the 135. planes which will leave the Berlin supply, when it is eliminated, will be assigned to the Military Air Service. Cannon, commander of the U.S. Air Force in Europe, announced that the first U.S. organizations in Europe will leave in September.