THE MlNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND. BOY: Cloudy with a few scattered showers. - IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 88 degrees; low, 76 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 39.88 inches of mercury.
NURVA YORK, "wtuhr* ta. (Pü). - In 1* afternoon today "a reported the" following" temperature": New York, 87; Chicago, 64; Wáahlngton, 84; Mia. mi, 88. Forecast for" mafia"" in New York and neighboring rindadea: cloudy with" scattered" shower". the highest temperature between M and 70. Wind" moderate" wind" from" the" bat.
TOMORROW DAILY f
YEAR XXX
Entered ae second class matter. Post Office. San Juan. P. B
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 15, 1949
NUMBER 13815
FIVE CENTS
Interior Requests 815,606,500 For 1950
Substantial amount to be devoted to roads Plans to isolate land ceded by Navy to avoid slums Fnr S. GAIvm Mataran" Editor of EL MUNDO More than five million dollars has been requested by the Department of the Interior for the first phase of the Seventh Economic Program. The total amount requested by the Department amounts to $15,608,500 of which $4,000,000 would be dedicated to the construction and improvement of island highways and urban roads. These funds would be matched with federal funds. For the construction of municipal roads, the Department is requesting $3,000,000 for this first year, and for the reconstruction of existing roads, $2,000,000, and $300,000 for improvements to existing urban roads. Other" Projects" The Department of the Interior has also requested for this first year of the Economic Program, $300,000 for equipment and materials: $45,000 for improvements to the building where the Department's central offices are located; $250,000 to continue the completion of the Island Capitol; $8,500 for needs at the "Capitanías de Puerto"; and $17,000 for the construction of a bridge over the Cerrillo River in the city of Ponee. Among the requests for funds from the Department of the Interior, submitted to the Planning Board, is one for $55,000 for the construction of an air fence on public lands in San Juan Bay. José R. Nogueras, head of the Finance Division of the Planning Board, explained yesterday that the request is based on the purpose of preventing the land ceded to the Island Government by the Tenth Naval District, in the port area, from becoming a slum. The officials of the Department of the Interior believe, explained Mr. Nogueras, that by building this fence around the land, it will prevent houses from appearing overnight, thus eliminating the possibility that after a few months another slum will be developed in the metropolitan area. Topographic Map The Department of the Interior also requests the sum of $80,000 for the preparation and publication of a topographic map of the Island at a scale of one by sixty thousand, and $50,000 for the execution of a flight over the Island, in connection with the same work. In connection with the flight, in its report to the Board, the Department of the Interior states that the last one that was made was in the year 1940, and since said date up to the present, an infinite number of highways have been built on the Island, and therefore, the same is now obsolete. The purpose is to take topographic views. The Department of the Interior also requests $5,931,000 for operating expenses. Isabela Irrigation In connection with the Isabela Irrigation, $8,140,000 is requested for the completion of hydroelectric plant number 4 and for the construction of rural electrification plants, $40,000. For the expenses of the Design and Public Works Division, the Department requests $150,000 for the first year of the Program.
Three warships of the Dominican Republic will be stationed in San Juan from the 20th to the 23rd of this month, as an act of reciprocity for the courtesy visit of Admiral Daniel E. Barbey to that country last August. A delegation of the President of the Dominican Republic, headed by Ambassador Plenipotentiary Julio Ortega Frier, former Minister of Foreign Affairs and former Ambassador to Washington, will be aboard one of the ships. Brigadier General José Garda Trujillo will represent the Army and Captain César do Wlndt Lavandier, the Navy. Both are heads of the respective services they represent. The ships and their commanders are: the destroyer Generalísimo, commander Rogelio Salvador Presto! Botello; the frigate Presidente Trujillo, commander Luis Fecundo Esteva; and the frigate Presidente Peynado, commander, Moisés Ellodoro Cordero Fuentes. The visitors will be entertained by the Admiral and Consul Francisco Perez Leyba, and will receive the same courtesy treatment given to similar visitors from Cuba, Venezuela, Argentina, Colombia and Great Britain, according to reports.
J. M. Combs Makes Advocacy For Island
Astor Reiterates Cooperation With University
Expresses Pleasure To Medical Association To Establish School The Medical Association of Puerto Rico has reiterated its offer of cooperation to the authorities of the University of Puerto Rico for the establishment of the School of Medicine. In accordance with the" recent" statement*" of the Rector of the UPR, in the sense that the School of Medicine will begin to operate soon, the President of the" Medical Association, Dr. Manuel Astor, published a" statement addressed" to the medical class, in "his Monthly Letter. The statements d*l Dr. Astor read as follows: "Recently there has been published in the daily Press, extensive information in rala, clon with the School of Medicine of the University of Puerto Rico, which in all probability will begin to function when the next school year begins. "This presidency has had the opportunity to hold several exchanges of impressions with Rector Benitez and with Dr. Brown, and has been able to personally corroborate all the information published". Reiterates Cooperation "We are very pleased that the efforts to provide our island with a medical school, have reached their full development, and we are even more pleased to see that all efforts towards this end have been channeled along the path traced by 1" Medical Association, ie, towards 1" organizes, clon of a medical school that is at the height of the most prestigious in this hemisphere. "On repeated occasions we have offered to Rector Renltez and Dr. Brown the most determined support of the Puerto Rican medical class for the successful realization of their projects.
The President of the Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Ftllpo de Mostos, in a letter addressed to our editor, Mr. Enrique Ramirez Brau, indicates that the information that appeared in yesterday's edition of EL MUNDO, about the meeting of the Chamber of Commerce, gives the impression that he, Mr. De Mostos, was the source of information from which Ramirez Brau obtained the data that was published. In this regard, our editor states: "It is my purpose to inform the readers of EL MUNDO that Mr. De Mostos was not the person from whom I obtained the information about the meeting held by the Chamber of Commerce. The source of information was another and this one cannot be revealed by *1 journalist, "It is true that, as on every occasion, I approached Mr. De Mostos to request, if possible, that he give me details of the meeting of the Board of Directors of the Chamber of Commerce, which he refused to do. I was not even informed by Mr. De Mostos that he was on vacation or that he intended to "mudsling" to the United States, as he did yesterday. On the trip of Mr. De Mostos to the United States, the Chamber of Commerce yesterday issued the following communiqué: "Mr. FUipo L. de Mostos, President of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America, has been informed by the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America that he is going to the United States. de Mostos, President of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, flew today to Washington, D.C., for the purpose of attending the joint meeting of the Executive Committee of the Inter-American Council of Commerce and Production and the Board of Trustees of the Inter-American Council of the United States to be held in that city on the 15th, 18th and 17th of (Continued on Page 14 Col. 7)
Raises Need For Social Security Explains Before House Discrimination Means Not Giving It To Boricnas By WILLIAM DORVn.LIER WASHINGTON, Oct. 14 (Special to EL MUNDO) - Rep. J.M. Comba, D-Texas, told Congress that the inclusion of Puerto Rico in the old-age and survivors insurance provisions of the Social Security Act was "very justified and proper." In a statement in the Congressional Record, Combs "expressed his 'appreciation on behalf of two million American citizens for the House's adoption of the measure, which constituted "a unanimous recognition of Puerto Rico's need for the direct assistance provisions of social security"). Thus," Combs added, "ten years after the social security system went into effect, Puerto Rico appears to be on its way to substantial participation in it." The House measure, as passed, he said, represents progress for Puerto Rico. "Its effect," he said, "over the next few years, will help make the island a more complete social community." Comba said it was just 1a Inclusion of Pitarlo Rico. IF a national social insurance system is Justified, he added, "then there is little justification for discriminating on regional or local grounds." ♦ NecMlted of Insurance "The higher the Income, no matter where a beneficiary lives, the less the need to extend the "canco of insurance; the lower the Income, no matter where the beneficiary lives, the greater the need for extension." Low incomes in Puerto Rico, he said, are attributed, not " a low cost of living or an indifference to" opportunity"" d" work but to a lack of capital, which" provides for higher productivity, and as a consequence, higher incomes. "1,0a Tala workers only earn enough, in their a fio" of vitality, to continue to "uh "lation," Combs declared. "Serla contrary to the flloaifla of social insurance the Insist that in Ja old age the deprivations of lá life" are not reduced, but that the peaares of Youth and middle age continue and ae aggravated." It is preferable, he said, that the low-income workers should not merely be guaranteed direct assistance during their old age, but a penalty which, to a large extent, they themselves have paid for. "Durant" artos los consumidores puertorrlquefios han "atado pagando por 1a majority d" sus alimentos y otros productos de consumo a lo" precio" del Continente," said Combs, "Jos qu" seguramente reflejan Impuestos de seguro social para los obreros continentales." He added that social security is as much a part of the American way of life as free education, and is as important to all American citizens as military security. "It is not fair to live and work," he said, "and consume, within the American economic system, and yet be deprived of the economic security that the system is supposed to offer its component parts. And Puerto Rico has been a component part of the American economic system since 1900." 'Combs said the contention in the House that the inclusion of Puerto Rico would create an undue burden on the Federal Insurance Fund was unfounded. "Puerto Ricans, as consumers. "on dependent on the Mainland for most of* their" products; at present they indirectly pay " that fund. He did not (Cont. on page 14, Col. 7).
Reds Guilty: Their Lawyers To Prison For Contempt of Court
s W 4$' ■ . * waBL., --♦i* 1 ■ JUDGE HAROLD MEDINA *
By H. D. Qulgg NEW YORK, Oct. 14.(FU).-The Federal Court Jury today found eleven prominent leaders of the American Communist Party guilty of conspiracy to advocate the overthrow of the Government by violence. Immediately thereafter, six of their lawyers were sentenced to prison for criminal contempt of court. In effect, the verdict outlawed the American Communist Party. The Jury deliberated solidtf seven hours and two minutes to find the members of the Political Bureau of the American Communist Party guilty of the crime charged in the indictment, which alleged that they projected an armed laeurrecclon to create a "dictatorship of the proletariat." Judge Harold R. Medina, who i .(Continued on Page 14 Col. 1)
Preparations are underway to celebrate United Nations Day í ■
The vMBH K * "I JAI 52 z Kcunldn" "n the Frcaldcnta of the Supreme Court for the purpose' <1* to formulate the program" for" I" celebration of La" Náclnnea Unidas Day, we see, from left to right, from eapalda", loa "eAores FrandMO Collazo, "uhcomhlonado de Instrucción; licenciado Reñirlo Sánchez (""taño y coronel Antonio R. AJIva. In the ml "mn order, from the front: Juei Angel R. De Jesús, Licenciado Ernesto Ramo" Antonin!, Licenciado Angel Pnventud, Licenciado Celestino Irlarte Miró and Licenciado José Vlllai-onga Chárrle". (Photograph from EL MUNDO).
Poíicía Varies His Testimony; Judge Admonishes
Muñoz Appoints Judge De Jesus To Preside At Meeting Held To Discuss Organization Of A Public Enlightenment Campaign On Sunday 21 By Juan Martinez Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer Puerto Rico will prominently celebrate the United Nations Day on the 24th of this month. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Mr. Angel R. de Jesús, was designated by the Governor to preside over and nominate the presidents of the United Nations.
However, he preferred not to accuse of contempt. Defendants Acquitted
Pedro Delgado, policeman 1n "ul "r who serves in the prosecution of Violators of the Law of Bo|| le, was yesterday close to being prosecuted for the crime of contempt for perjury; and two ehor"" whom the agent had denounced, were acquitted because the evidence seized against them was obtained lie. Calmly. This rare incident took place at the San Juan District Court, where Judge Santos Borg was acting in commission. Policeman Delgado was testifying as a witness in the case against the referred women, whose names are Emma Candelario Roman and Maria Ramos, and told the court that the search warrant (by means of which he searched the house of the two women obtaining evidence that gave rise to the accusations) had been obtained on the basis of a confidence, but that he had not seen them handling ball material. Alegó le Constaba Debido a qu" en la declaración jurada prestada ante el juez Francisco Vlzearrondo del Tribunal Municipal de San Juan, para obtener la orden de allanamiento, /I agente Delgado dijo que le constaba - por haberlas visto - qu" la" acusada" manipulaban material de bollto, el fiscal Honorato Pandolfl procedió a Impugnar a su propio tesfigo, alegando que estaba cometiendo perjurio. The choked d" 1a" accused, lawyer Gustavo Jiménez Sicardó, went ahead and "legó that the declara "Jón of the policeman demonstrated qu" 1" evidence speaks "ido" obtained Hegilmente reason why he requested the peremptory absolution of its clients. The Jum Resuelve The prosecutor Pandolfl objected to eLjuez resolving the matter until "- acted against the policeman Delgado. The magistrate a" directed the agent, who was still in 'n witness chair telling him; 'Look policeman, don't s" tangle any more." Here the magistrate initiated a council, qu" rcmqtó "ílclendo who believed that Del(Continued on ." p. 14. col. 7)
Judge Strikes Twelve Jurors In Mayagüez Who Acted In Case Against SruInHe. (By Rl. cardo VIHamlD- The judge of the Mayagüez District Court, attorney Willis Ramos, issued a resolution today ordering the elimination as jurors of the twelve gentlemen who acted in the case against SruInHe. Joaquín Santaliz Carbonell. This one was accused by "1 prosecutor of murder in second degree, and was declared acquitted "1 insisting the Jury in a verdict of Involuntary homicide. The judge rejected the latter verdict, alleging that it was not in accordance with the final Instructions he gave to the Jury. In those Instructions, the Judge did not mention the possibility of an Involuntary Manslaughter verdict. Twelve Removed" This" case has caused a great stir in the city, due to its nature, the jurors have been totally and definitively removed from the District Court, unable to return in the future. These were the sefiores Francisco Miró, Héólor Ronda, Jr.; Enrique Torres, A. Oppenheimer, Felipe Más, Domingo Ronet, Javier Arbona, José Irizarry ¡ Rublo, José A. Rodríguez Lugo. Reinaldo Mejfas, Jenaro d "l Valle and Antonio Carrero. Two of the jurors", 1o" sefiores José I. Rublo and Francisco Miró,-the" last president -j; They informed this Editor that "after I (Continued on Page .14
They informed this Editor that "after I (Continued on Page 14) -cnmlté that they are preparing Ins plan" for the arlos that will take place that day. At the invitation of Judge D" J""ús, yesterday morning a preliminary meeting was held in one of the "alone" of the Supreme Court, which was attended by the President of the House of Representatives, Ernesto Ramo" Antonlnl; the Deputy Commissioner of Instruction, Francisco Collazo; Jose Angel Poventud; Celestino Triarte; Benlclo Sanchez Castaño, president of the College of Drowned"; Antonio R. Silva, "dmlnlitrador d" the Red Cross; Antonio l Texldor, governor of the Dlatrito ! Rotarlo d" Puerto Rico; Federico García Veve, governor of the Lions' District; Dr. Manuel A "tor, president of the Modica Association of Puerto Rico; José Vlllaronga Chárrlez; Gustavo Agralt, assistant to the Governor, and Juan Martínez Chapel. There was a general exchange of impressions to formulate the broadest possible plan for the celebration of United Nations Day, date on which the General Assembly will receive information on the origin, purposes and principles of the institution. Aid to Solicítame । The aid of the Press, radio, schools, schools, civic societies, labor organizations, fraternal organizations, will be solicited to help spread and make understood the purposes of this union of Nations, created to maintain international peace and security, to end and prevent threats to peace and to suppress acts of aggression; and to achieve by peaceful means, the peaceful and peaceful means of achieving the objectives of the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations. to achieve by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, the solution and settlement of international disputes which might result in armed conflict. The celebration of this anniversary will seek to promote understanding of the aims of the United Nations to foster friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equality and non-discrimination. I respect for the principle of equality of rights, and the self-determination of the public," and to provide international cooperation in the solution of international problems of an economic, "oclal, cultural or humanitarian character. The United Nations should be known as a group of nations willing to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to provide international cooperation in the solution of international problems of an economic, cultural, cultural or humanitarian character.
Ambassador Receives Congratulations
■t*; * ' ' '■* FÁ ■■ " ■ ' - > ■ "Vk4 * Jl r " - % II Leu \ i - - - a IMF ji > ■ <'áwBBBPWí l ** '3f "áwslMBRw - 4 Mrs. Eugenie Anderson, appointed by "1 President Truman United States Ambassador to Denmark, receives congratulations by long-distance call on the old-fashioned wall telephone at her home on a farm five püUas from Red Wlng, Mlneeeota. (Photo P, A.) * .
A Household Plan - For S3,700 Price - Is Under Consideration
Committee Approved Postal Rate Increase Estimated Annual Figure Would Be df> $130,000,000. Cards Would Cost 2c. WASHINGTON, Oct. 14 (PU) - The House Ways and Means Committee has approved a bill to increase the postage rate by $130,000,000. The bill doubled the rates for postcards from one cent to 2 cents, and increased most of the rates for second-class material, which includes newspapers and other publications. The Committee's "experts" estimated that postcards alone would add $16,000,000 annually to the mail receipts: The increase in second-class matter amounted to $1,1,500,000. The Senate passed a similar bill increasing postal rates by $100,000,000. "1 The proposed increase has fallen far short of that desired by Postmaster General Jesse M. Donaldson to meet the deficit in his department which amounts to about $500,000,000 annually. For newspapers, the increase would be about ten percent of what Donaldson had asked for.
Navy Attack May Affect Naval Aviation Could Cancel Proposed Reductions In Naval Aviation
Fo r CHARLES CORDDRY ' j WASHINGTON, Oct. 14; (PU) - Informed sources said today that the Navy's attack on unification may cancel new proposed reductions in naval aviation, but that the admiral's hope of reviving his canceled "uperportavlone" appears dashed. The assessment of the situation was expressed as an uneasy weekend lull interrupted the raucous inter-service dispute that has been raging in public hearings of the House Armed Services Committee. When the hearings resume next week, Secretary of Defense Johnson and Secretary of the Air Force Stuart Symington will answer the vigorous charges made by the top Navy officers during the past week, Gen. Dwight D. Elsenhower and General Dwight D. Elsenhower. D. Elsenhower and General Omar N. Rradley, chairman of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, have also testified. JjO" naval carriers" complained >that "t "he establishment d" unification has "pellgrgrgrgrossly" belittled naval power and exaggerated the value of the Air Force's R-.16 atomic bomber. They called for an" opportunity to proceed with construction of the sixty-thousand-ton United Eatados aircraft carrier, cancelled by Johnson last spring, and asked Congress to amend the d" Unification Act to limit Johnson's power to reduce Navy spending in the future. Carl Vlnson, D-Georgia and chairman of the committee, backed the latter request. He also accused "Johnson of currying favor with the public by projecting reductions (Continued on Page 14 Col 4).
Picó Returned; Attended Reorganization Committee Meeting
Yesterday morning, Dr. Rafael Picó, president of the Planning Board and who was elected president of the American Association of Planning Officials at its convention, returned to the island. In the Pan American World Airways plane corresponding to flight 215, which arrived at Isla Grande at 8:15 yesterday morning, Dr. Picó arrived. Several government officials, officers of the Board of Plans, his wife and his two young daughters welcomed Dr. Pied, expressing their satisfaction for the honor conferred upon him. The A.A.F.P. convention lasted from Sunday to Wednesday and was attended by about two thousand members representing 100 official bodies, in charge" of activities re(Continued on Page 14 Col. 3)
■ Mk DR. RAFAEL PICO
RAFAEL
Fullana Firm Would Make Them in Mass Would Take Advantage of Extensive Offer On Credits. Would Make 5,000 Annually Fnr Rurlcn F. Rivera Rodertor do EL MUNDO - The port contractor firm, rriquefios Fullans Construction Co, has submitted for consideration d"! Governor Luis Mufioz .Marín, and the Insular X" Asuntog Coordinator of Homes, Cirder" DAvila, a private vivando" programs, at a rosto d" Ponstntrción maximum per unit of' 700 which is Inferior to rostn d* 1n" projects built to date. D* acuerdo ron Información nh. tenida por EL MUNDO, a ♦ravé" del sefior Pedro Fullana, pres'd.nta d" the firm d* rontratist". m "nrionada, *1 program, d" be approved pnr 1ns authorities that are studying it m these moments, be realized it to an average d* 1 "00 to 5,000 annual houses"", "limen, tándose the number if the demand justifies it. As a special feature of this program, the firm of contractors Fullana undertakes to furnish, for each 10O units built, a classroom which will become the property of the Government without the latter investing a single cent.
Price" per unit*. The aefior Pedro Fullana informs that the program submitted dispolía that Id" sale prices d* this" houses, nestled in lots d" 252 meter" square", will not exceed do $.1,700 and will not be sold in excess d "l value that determines the A, F. H. Four types of homes have s|, do prepared", namely: model B, for $3,000 with facilities d" do" , habltaclonea, "ala dining room, oak and hafto; model C, for $3.400 eon do" rooms, "ala-comed or, co- , elna bafio and porch; model D. n "r" $3,300 with do" rooms, "ala-co-medor, kitchen, bafio and a porch máa pequefio than type C; model E, three hahltaclonea, sall-comedor. rocina and bafio for $.1,W. T and type F, same as above but with porch for $3,700. Payment plan will be made through the A. F. H. Veterans would not be required to make any prompt payment. Civilians would be required to make a down payment of 10 percent of the value of the property. The monthly rent to pay for the property over a 20-year term will be as follows: From $17 a month to $22, plus contributions and insurance that would increase 1" monthly rent to approximately 829. Site" to be built by La Fulana -Construction Corporation, as indicated by "efior P*dro Fullana. to begin the program in { the cities of" Ronce, MayajíGez and Arecibo, 5' in those towns where the demand for this type of housing "- justifies. According to a study recently conducted by Dr. Rafael Picó, of the Board of Plañe", the demand for this type of vi* : viandas is as follows in the following municipalities: San Juan and metropolitan area, ¡3,800 units; Ponce. 1,400; Maye- , gílez, 1,000; Arecibo 350; Caguai > 350; Guayama 250; Aguadilla 250; Cayey 200; Coamo 100; Fajardo 100; Guánica 100; Humacao 100; Manatí 100; and Yauco 100. The Fullana Corporation currently has several plots of land selected in Ponce, Ma" ryagUez and other towns in the area, and if the "X" program is approved, the firm will immediately begin the construction of these homes. Type d" Housing" According to sefior Fullana. "1 Upo ¡ of housing submitted by "u corporation to the Government entails the following ¿facilities: The housing "will be in eu totality of reinforced reinforced concrete, fulfilling the same with all" Jo" most demanding" requirement" of design as well as all.lo" code" of construction of the" agenclaa Ipaularea i and federal, and able to reslatir lo" effort" to which they can "er "orne- ' ' tldas by cyclone or earthquake. The sefior Fullana expresses, that "he low cost of the" mentioned houses has been achieved by "1 i use of a modular system d" corner that facilitates in such a way au construction allowing to make a great economy in the manpower and materials, increasing by said | method its strength eitructural. "A sample of this type of housing can be observed by any interested party at the Puerto Rico Homes Authority's property in Isla Verde, where three vlvleiv daa of the aforementioned type have been copatruído". Sefior Fullana added, that "the design of this home offers enormous flexibility for the future expansion of the home by its owner," Financing According to the program submitted by the Fullana Corporation, not only the owner, but also the owner of the home, as well as the owner of the home,