THE NfiNDO
NEW YORK. dec. 3$. (PU). - The following temperatures were reported this afternoon: New York, 48 1 Chicago, 14t Washington, 88; Miami, 81, Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: clear and more Dio with the highest temperature between 88 and 40,
/KONOincos on nsitro r*KA THE ISLAND. ROY: Partly cloudy with a few showers, mostly tonight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low, 88 degrees. Sea level gauge pressure at 4:80 p.m., 29.87 inches of mercury.
MORNING PAPER, THE FIRST AND ONLY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, Foot Office. San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY DECEMBER 24, X 1949'.
NUMBER 13885 FIVE CENTAVOS
Island Set to Suffer $35,000,000 Loss
For Next Year's Harvest Garcia Mendez Explains - Danger of Surplus and Production Estimate By J. M. (JARCIA CALDERON EL MUNDO Staff Writer Juan B. Garcia Mendez, executive vice president of the Sugar Producers Association, said yesterday that the estimate of U.S. sugar consumption, set at 7,509,000 tons by the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture, does not affect Puerto Rico at all, and may instead seriously harm the island. According to Mr. Gareln Méndez, Puerto Rico's sugar production for the year 1050 will reach 1,300,000 tons, while the total amount allocated to the Island for export and local consumption is 1,010,000 tons. Mr. Garcia Mendez also said that there is currently a surplus of 96,000 tons on the island, which has probably dropped to 90,000 tons due to the losses. The sugar producers' spokesman added that the Island's normal inventory is 100,000 tons, which together with the total quota for export and local consumption, adds up to 1,110,000 tons of sugar. Danger for the Island Because the Island can produce 1,300,000 tons and there is a surplus of 90,000 tons, Puerto Mico will face the problem of not being able to sell 280,000 tons, which represents about $35,000,000. t Asked if he believed that the situation of the sugar industry could be resolved, Mr. Garcia Mendez replied: "I think it is very difficult due to the pressure from various domestic and foreign areas, especially Cuba, for Congress to review the Sugar Law. "However," he added, "Congress can pass remedial legislation to help Puerto Rico, and that could cost Congress five or six million dollars. "A people who spend so many stalks in Europe," said Garcia Mendez, "may well spend five or six millions in Puerto Rico, speclaimants al so take into account that the sale of 280,000 tons of sugar represents $35,000,000 which will enter the general circulation stream of the States dns. "E! Remedy "The remedy to the situation." continued Mr. Garda Mendez. "would be for Congress to provide that the ECA purchase sugar at the world price, giving the Puerto Rican producer a subsidy representing the difference between the world price and the New York price. "Assuming the subsidy per ton was $25.00, it would represent $5,740,000," said Garcia Mendez. The APA's executive representative added that even with the suggested remedy, it would always conser(Continued on 1" page 20. Col, 8,) Wage Hearings End For Fruit Industry Federal Committee Announces It Has Asked For Minimum 30c. The Industrial Committee which studied, and recommended minimum wages for various Industries covered by the Federal Wage and Hour Law, concluded its work by recommending a minimum wage of 30 c "n$ tavos per hour for the vegetable, fruit and nut packing and processing Industry. In a note to that effect, the San Juan office of the Wage and Hour Division authorizes the following: "Industrial Committee No. 8 ended its work on Wednesday, December 21. The last industry to be considered was Vegetable, Fruit and Nut Packing and Processing, which is defined as follows: Handling, sorting, grading, packing and preparation in their raw or natural state of fresh vegetables, fresh fruit, and nuts; drying, blanching, brining or other preservation of fruits and fruit rinds; drying and other preparation of vanilla beans, coffee beans and cocoa beans; - canning of vegetables, fruits, and fruit juices; and the manufacture or processing (and packing together with the manufacture or processing) of coffee, bland chocolate, jellies, preserves, jams, fruit pastes, fruit pastes, similar products, "The vote was unanimous for a 30 cents an hour wage. This wage will not go into effect until the Administrator has held public hearings at Wishington, D. C. "During the coming <*fio different committees will be formed to consider various other Industries. Dates of the hearings will be let known in due course."
There will be in U.S.A. Very Cold Christmas Safety Council Predicts 435 Deaths From Yesterday to Monday CHICAGO, Dec. 23. - (PU) - A snowy or at least very cold Christmas was forecast today for most of the Nation. Already traffic for this holiday season is quite congested and looks likely to set an all-time record. The National Safety Council predicted that 435 people will die between 6 p.m. today and midnight Monday, a record estimate for Christmas Day. A wave of cold air is sweeping across the Appalachians and heading east and south toward the Atlantic coast, ending the record-breaking warm weather. In Cleveland, Ohio, where a record high seasonal high of 63 degrees was set, the mercury had dropped to 27 this morning. In New York City, with 59 yesterday, temperatures were reported near 40 today. There are cold snap forecasts for western Nebraska and South Dakota. Below freezing temperatures were reported in portions of the Dakotas, Montana, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois and Iowa. Pembina, North Dakota, reported temperatures of 25 below zero this morning. Snow is predicted for the central North Dakota, Illinois, Indiana, eastern Iowa, Minnesota and southern Wisconsin. Minnesota and southern Wisconsin. 5,000 Sent To 982 Teachers For Studies Take Courses At UPR In First Semester For Improvement By BENJAMIN SANTANA Staff Writer EL MUNDO i The Department of Instruction yesterday sent the island $15,990 in grants to 982 active duty teachers who were authorized to take courses at the University, with the help of island funds. Of the $80,000 given to the Department of Instruction for scholarship purposes, Commissioner Mariano Villlaronga earmarked $30,000 for local scholarships, after agreement with the Personnel Office. The 982 beneficiaries of the Local Instructional Scholarship Plan were selected from among the 2,503 teachers who applied for the benefits offered. The plan, under which teachers are paid 50 percent of their university tuition, arose when they protested because the authorities of our first educational center increased their tuition fees. Order of Priorities The new plan of studies for professional improvement sets forth certain conditions and requirements for receiving the benefits of the local schools, J In promulgating the plan, Commissioner Vlllaronga announced that such grants would be awarded according to the following order of priorities: j 1-Elementary school teachers who have not completed the Normal Course, 2-Teachers of other categories who do not possess the regular license for the position they are holding, 3-Teachers who have not completed the Normal Course, 4-Teachers of other categories who do not possess the regular license for the position they are holding, 5-Teachers of other categories who do not possess the regular license for the position they are holding, 6-Teachers of other categories who do not possess the regular license for the position they are holding, 7-Teachers of other categories who do not possess the regular license for the position they are holding. 3-Teachers not. Included in the" above sections. The 2,503 teachers who applied for aid for the payment of their tuition were classified as follows: 1,134 were teachers who have not completed the Normal Course; 74 were teachers of other categories who do not have the regular license for the position they hold, and 1,285 were teachers with a regular license in their respective positions. After careful study of all these applications, it was agreed to grant 933 scholarships to elementary teachers with a regular license, and 49 to teachers who have a license, but who do not meet the requirements for the position they hold. The plan was prepared in accordance with the provisions of Law . 136 of April 28, 1949, which । made possible, for the first time, the partial payment of tuition to teachers interested in pursuing professional studies in the Extension and Extramural courses, and the Commissioner of Instruction, the Commissioner of Instruction, will (Continued on page 20, 3.)
Precautions Taken for the Passage of Railcars Through the Danger Zone
■MigM f - - - > - uL .Jar* |O 4 " | W- ' J ■ ; w<
Yesterday morning numerous precautions were taken to drive some 26 freight cars through the danger zone where a large quantity of gasoline had been impounded at the three and a half percent stop at Puerta de Tierra. The railroad was begged with fomltc. A locomotive pushed the cars until the first one passed out of the danger zone. Then another locomotive, which came from-
11 Perish In Plane Disaster Figures Among Deaths Rogers Hornsby Son. - SAVANNAH, Dec. 23, - (PU) - Air Force rescue parties marched through miles of mangroves today to the wrecked wreckage of a B-50 bomber and reported that all eleven men who "e danced to bnrdo. Including the son of Rogers Hornsby, an Immortal figure in baseball, were dead. Lieutenant Rogers Hornsby, hiJo, was the navigator of the modified superfortress which went down last night among the salt marshes of the Savannah riel estuary. The nvlon exploded and set fire to the mangrove swamp in an area rie seven miles northeast of Savannah. Rescue patrol members said they have recovered only four bodies. The others were in the depths of a crater formed by the explosion. None of the crewmen had a chance to survive, Air Force headquarters at Chatman Fielri said. (Continued on page 29, Col. 4 )
Train Crash Paralyzes Traffic in New York Section Mikx of People Leaving Work Several Hours Delayed Due to Accident NEW YORK, Dec. 23 (EÜpecIol riel N*w York Timbe) - Dov , Iron's empty rie pnsajor rio the Long lalanri Railroad colladMin today at* Sunnyside, Queens, at 5:44 o'clock in the afternoon, resulting in the deaths of two ope-
> ratlotos and opos five injured. ♦ The collision occurred on In In most agíI tario rial "rush", and resulted in a complete stoppage of traffic at Pennsylvania and Jamai1 ca station for nearly three hours. A partial service was resumed at 6:20 - p.m. Thousands of people were in the streets. 1 Thousands of commuters were unable to return to their jobs until after several hours of waiting at Pennsylvania Station. Thousands of others boarded subway trains to ■ Brooklyn or Jamaica, where they took regular trains to dlriglr- ■ ■ home, I The accident occurred as the two empty trains were heading full speed to the Pennsyl- " venia station to pick up passengers. The first train, carrying 12 cars, was stopped by a signal that appeared on the track. The Second Train i The second train, carrying II - cars, advanced toward the last car. Some of the operators saw it approaching and ran to the front, thus escaping death or injury. ) I (Continued on page 20, Col. 1.)
Mr. Pedro Gil, head of the Department of Education's Department of Instruction's Department of Veterans' Education Department, warns that the main purpose of federal aid studies is not to provide the veteran with a livelihood. In response to certain statements made by Mr. Alejandro Nieves Natal, published in yesterday's edition, Mr. Gil reveals documents in which the commercial preparation of the veterans in the short courses is judged as deficient. - Mr. Nieves Natal requested the Commissioner of Instruction to revise his order so that veterans would not be accepted in the short courses of the certified private commercial schools, as of January 1, next year. He asked that this restriction be lifted, so that veterans who do not have time to complete the course will have the opportunity to receive their compensation of $120 per month. Explaining that the federal compensation of $120 per month is not a livelihood but an aid to study, Mr. Gil stated the following: "Mr. Nieves Natal loses sight of the fact that the main objective of this course is not that the veteran would earn a livelihood for his family, but to rehabilitate the veteran, primarily in skills for which he has a vocation and for which there is a demand in the job market. "This criterion is clearly outlined in the Veterans' Administration's regulations, and we would leave (Continued on page 20, Col. 2.)
" -... ... r - A.F.F. Warns of Christmas Tree Fire Dangers
The Water Resources Authority has distributed to its employees a pamphlet containing recommendations prepared by its Safety and Accident Prevention Department regarding the care that should be exercised in homes where Christmas trees are lighted. The brochure states that "every year hundreds of fires originate in hundreds of hocerca fires that turn the Christmas holidays, which are the most joyful of the family celebrations, into tragedies and mourning. "Christmas Fires," it says more afielante, "which are caused by various external reasons, - trees and highly flammable decorations,- take place in homes, in schools and in public buildings." The (ansas The Autoridari ri" Fluvla- sources.
The A. F. F. F. states the causes of the fires, pointing out among these the flames, the defective electrical illuminations and the flammable decorations generally used in these celebrations, says the A. F. F. F. that the knowledge of the causes of the fires is not only a matter of the fire prevention, but also of the fire prevention. F. F. that the knowledge rio these risks and the morio rie to come from them will contribute to that the rilas rie Navidari pass as joyful as it is rie riesoar and pata it the Department rio Sagúridnei and Prevention rie Accidents offers them the following rules, simple and easy rie to observe, that read serve ri* gula to riisfrutar rie some Christmas rilriarlos free rie fires and riezgraclas. Aon Inflammables "Few pors'onas," says the A. F, F" "know that Christmas trees are one of the most flammable objects in existence (ContlnúL on page 20, co!. 6).
Batalla Travels Escape Route Accompanied by Viera, Agentes
Miguel Angel Bttalla retraced last Thursday the entire route he followed in his escape after setting fire to the Almacenes Palou building on Fortaleza de San Juan Street. Batalla made the trip accompanied by prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez, lieutenant Benigno Soto and detectives Luis A. Pagani and Angel Luia Torres. The extraordinary tour was initiated in San Juan at 6:00 a.m. Thursday morning and ended at 10:00 p.m., when the group returned after visiting each and every one of the places where Batalla was taken before being apprehended. During the whole trip Batalla kept a very good mood and was explaining to the prosecutor Viera Martinez each of the steps he took, thus facilitating the confirmation of his statement given after his arrest. There was no violence In any of the towns where the group stopped, there was no expression of protest, nor was there any threat of violence from the public that attended.
violence on the part of the public who came to see Batalla. Batalla and Viera Martínez had lunch in Guayama, in a restaurant in front of the plaza, and then went to a pharmacy in Patillas, where he bought a medicine to cure the pain caused by the explosion he himself provoked. According to Batalla's account, once he set the building on fire, the explosion threw him against some store windows on the other side of Fortaleza Street. Without wasting time, despite the pain he felt from the burns, he ran quickly to the South Precinct, where he mounted a pirouette that took him to the Piedras de Piedras River. ■From Río Piedras Batalla went to Cagues, and followed the route to Gurabo, Juncos, Las Piedras, Humacao, Yabucoa, Maunabo, Patillas,'Arroyo, Guayama, Salinas, Santa Isabel, Juana Díaz and Ponce, Pefiuelas, Guayanilla, Yauco, ' Guinica, Lajas, San Germán and MayagUez. (Continued on page 20, Co!. 8).
<|o the Tras Talleres station pulled them and continued on to their destination. In this way none of the locomotives had to cross the Gasoline Impregnated zone. In the photograph we see part of the equipment that was used purely to spray gasoline along the route. Police and firemen *o kept alert for any emergency. (Photo rie EL MUNDO).
Agriculture Alludes Case X. Coffee Price Claims Arbitrio Wouldn't Make Grain More Expensive, Gives Four Alternatives
Mr. Ramón Colón Torres, commissioner of Agriculture, makes a non-thesis of the current coffee price situation in a letter addressed to our Director, in which he alludes to our editorial, "Una solución que no lo es". Mr. Colón Torres states that "the tax that would be imposed on coffee produced in Puerto Rico would not make coffee more expensive in any way, but would distribute the price differential that would otherwise go entirely to the producers. At the same time. he exposes four possible alternatives for action on the coffee crisis. Mr. Colón Torres maintains that "there has been a thorough and deep meditation, through a careful analysis of the whole situation from its different angles". The following is the letter from the Commissioner of Agriculture: "We have read with great interest your editorial "A Solution That Is Not" in your edition of EL MUNDO of Friday, December 16, 1949. Your editorial shows your great concern for the welfare of coffee growers, consumers and taxpayers of the country. Government officials, who have been studying very carefully the problems of the coffee industry, have also had the interests of the coffee growers, the consumers and the taxpayers of Puerto Rico very much in mind. "To the knowledge of the People of Puerto Rico, I would like to explain and summarize the current situation of the coffee industry and the fundamental reasons that have been taken into account when deciding on the most appropriate action that could be taken in this case. The price of coffee in Puerto Rico will necessarily have to rise. This is due to the fact that the price of coffee on the Island is today more than ever linked to the prevailing prices in the world market. This is so because Puerto Rico, dearie some years ago, besides being a pro;Contlnúa en la P. 11, Col. 1)
Bv. "fe n r Miguel A. Batalla, (right), who by his own confession set the fire on Fortaleza Street that killed eight people, talks with District Attorney Angel Viera Martínez. Batalla accompanied the prosecutor on a tour of the places where he fled after fleeing the scene of the incident and the route he took to reach Baba- na Grande, where he was arrested. (Photo EL MUNDO)
Federal Government Extends 25% Of The Differential
Monday Begins Benefit Here In Meeting Teachers $3,500,000 Governor, Pergonal Redor Connejo And Doro Take Part Operating On Island In Inaugural Program Managed Concession
T.he Puerto Rico Teachers' Association will meet in regular assembly on Monday and Tuesday next, at the University Theatre, according to the program already in circulation. Immediately thereafter will meet the Circle of Supervision and School Administration of Puerto Rico, on Wednesday, June 28. This other assembly will be held at the University's General Studies Hall, beginning at R:>0 a.m. In both assemblies, the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Vlllaronga, and other educational leaders of the Island will be present. At the assembly of the Teachers' Association on Monday night, Dr. Karl II, Rorns, undersecretary of the National Educational Association, will address the island teachers. That night the Governor, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, and the Rector, Mr. Jaime Renltez, will also speak, and the University Choir will give a concert. Another* Act* Signaled* During the Professional Session of I the assembly riel Circulo de Supervisión, on Wednesday will riiscutirá *1 । topic Interaction Between the School I and the Community, under the direction rirl subcomiMonadb, Francisco Collazo. । Participating in this forum, approaching the topic from different angui the, Professors Harry F, Bunker. Pablo Rosa, Alicia Torruellas, Bernardo Guerra, Juan E. Silva, Jose Martinez Almodovar and Guillermo ( (Continued on page 20, Col, 8.) Judge Denies Petition to Lower Bail Orders Diaz Figueroa to Remain in Jail on $40,000 Bail Judge Rodolfo Ramirez Tabon yesterday declared aln Jugar the habeas corpus petition of Nicolas Diaz Figueroa, who was requesting to lower the $40,000 bail set for him by Prosecutor Rafael Padró Parés. on a first-degree murder charge. Díaz Figueroa is accused of having killed Nicolás Díaz Jiménez with several revolver shots. Diaz Jimenez was a militant in the sector that fights the mayor Augusto P. Alvarez, and the accused in the opposite group. In the sentence, Judge Ramirez Pahon stated that in his opinion, the petitioner was in a condition to lend the fiaiv.a that he had been given the opportunity to prove his political and social relations. Judge Ramírez Pahón further states in his judgment that, i "as the Judiciary does not require that the courts be more ignorant than the rest of humanity with respect to events that are in the public domain, the Court takes judicial notice of the situation of unrest and violence that prevails in Rio Piedras, of the political factions and antagonisms existing in said city, rie aus armed groups i provoking each other and bringing Unrest to the "vMa rie the co- | munity, and of the Interest that in this- ' these caans are taken by the members l of the different factions to help- j give and protect their respective militants." On the Flan" Although the fixing of a bail continues to say 1a sentence -■ ¡ no, conatltutes a punishment nor can it be considered as such, when con- i curren circumstances camo Ins I noted above, it does not seem- | ce judicious to set bails that re- 1 sult absurdly low in proportion to the seriousness ri* tos acon- 1 freimientos. The fixing in such cases of low bonds could be interpreted as an invitation to continue the outrages and to continue to carry out acts of disorder and violence that endanger lives and the interests of society. "To illustrate the tension and unrest existing in Rio Pledrag and to give an idea of the participation and attitude of the petitioner in the events of which we have taken judicial notice, the prosecutor presented the statement of Elpidio Rodriguez Serrano, given by him on December 6, 1949, which alone establishes circumstances of such gravity and irresponsibility with respect to the petitioner that they should not be overlooked. In declaring the habeas corpua appeal inadmissible, Judge Raml- i rez Pabon ruled that Nicolas Diaz i (Continued on page 20. Col. 3>> <
Federal employees in Puer* i lo Rice will continue Oirciblendo du" r during the coming year 1950 the dlfe* renria! rie 25 percent on their salaries, as reported yesterday to EL MUNDO by Mr. Frank Hannon, president of the Federa1 ción rio Empleados Federales en Puerto Rico. Mr. Hannen reported that last night Mr. Kenneth Montgoe, chairman of the Personnel Council of Federal Employees on the island, sent a cable informing him that the federal Civil Service Commission had agreed to extend payment of the compensation during the year 1950. The cable was sent by Mr. Mervin Peake, director of the Veterans Administration staff in Puerto Rico. Mr. Peake is in Washington, D.C., where he made arrangements for the differential to continue to be extended to federal employees in Puerto Rico. The ' differential rail concession also applies to employees on the Island! । Virgin Islands .... Report of PU 1 In connection with this matter Preñe ■ sa United reported yesterday from Washington the following: It costs middle-income rio families 37.3 po relent more I to live in Puerto Rico than in the federal Ca1 pital, according to a study conducted by the Federal Personnel ' Council, Merwin M. Peake, who submitted the study to the Civil Service Committee yesterday, told the United Press that this is a fraction of a percent lower than the yearly average for the Federal Personnel Board in the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Peake submitted these figures to persuade the chairman of the Civil Service Comte alon. Harry B. Mita rhell. to continue the special 25 percent cost-of-living allowance paid this year to about 4,290 of the 10,000 federal civilian employees in Puerto Rico. An executive order issued by the President in September 1948 authorized up to 25 percent additional pay for federal employees in the territories and foreign countries. In Puerto Rico they got the maximum allotment on the first of this year. Peake estimated that the additional pay meant $3,500,000 a year to Puerto Rico's economy. He argued that this was a greater contribution to the island economy now than either the island's tourist industry or new industries could make. The federal study, based on prices during July and August, shows that the cost of food is an average of 37.46 per cent higher and that the cost of basic necessities and services is 31.73 per cent higher in Puerto Rico than in Washington, D.C. Sugar is the only item that is cheaper in the can than on the mainland. It costs 8 percent less, costing 48 rentavoa per five pounds in Washington versus 44 cents in San Juan Torios all other foods, da acuri do rondel study, cost more in Puerto Rico; bread and pastry items. 109 percent higherf । fruits and vegetables (canned, 55 percent: fresh fruits and vegetables, 51 percent: cereals, 41 percent: beverages, beverages and beverages. 41 percent: beverages, 32 percent; meats and poultry. 29 percent more; fats and oils, 27 percent more...dairy products and eggs, 16 percent more: and dried fruits and vegetables, 15 percent more. Otrng Expenditures Iall staples and services were indicated as higher in Puerto Rico than in Wáhtngton; pngos to | 0| physicians. dentists and optometrists, 46 percent more; automobiles, 45 percent more; Apparel. 44 percent more; merchandise sold by yard. 27 percent; electrical and household utensils. 40 percent; carpets and furniture, 25 percent; medicines, drugs and toiletries, up 7 percent. Employees of all federal agencies in Puerto Rico within the classified civil service will benefit from a one-year extension of the 25 percent federal differential in their salaries. This. This includes the postal services. Immigration, agriculture, health, sanitation, labor, tesmeríx. Engineering, etc., in addition to civilian employees of the Armed Forces* appointed on a tenure basis under the federal Civil Service Act. / This news has caused in lé" Juan great rejoicing, The World's World having received numerous appointments during the day of ay(9j I federal employees on, the n. cular. \