THE MONDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with rain showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 78 degrees: low, 70. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 80.01 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Feb. A (FU) - peraturaa: Nu*va York, M; Oúoom, 24; Wáahington. 48: Mtaml, N. Guard!*, a laa 7 F. M.: maxiaaa height, eight hundred plaa; viability, mile and a half, with smoke and fog; Tientoe, proc "d*ntee from the west norooeá*. at di** aulla* per hour. Fróxúnaa I horaa, ifual. Tomorrow: good weather in general.
MARAÑA JOURNAL
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Foot Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1949
NUMBER 13568
FIVE CENTS
Villaronga Requests Action On Island
Requests Endorsement of Bill of Instruction Commission of Educators to Attend Hearings. - By BenjamínFsANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Sa is organizing a gigantic campaign in favor of Puerto Rico's inclusion as a state in the Federal Aid for Instruction Bill. The campaign, according to "e reported, will be an extraordinary effort to get Congress to allow the island to be placed on a parity with the 48 states of the Union, in order to receive the greatest benefits from the measure. All teachers, students, and numerous entities and professionals in general will be mobilized in the campaign. Representatives of the Teachers' Association, the Insular Parent-Teacher League and the Department of Instruction will travel to Washington next week to advocate for the measure. The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, requests citizens, civic and religious organizations, and the people in general, to address Congress immediately, by cables and air letters, advocating that Puerto Rico be placed on a parity with the states. Status of the Bill The measure has not yet been filed in the U.S. House of Representatives. It has been filed in the Senate. In the Upper House it will be considered before the 11th, according to information sent by the EducativikNaclonal Association to its director in Puerto RIm, Professor José Joaquín Rivera. \ Lately, it had some sectarian opposition, but the NEA was able to overcome it quickly, leaving everything ready for its approval. The Education and Labor Committee of the House of Representatives is currently discussing the bill. Professor José Joaquín Rivera communicated by telephone with Dr. Willard E. Givens, executive secretary of the National Education Association, and the latter suggested the advisability of carrying out the above-mentioned campaign, and of moving a commission to Washington as soon as possible. It is expected that the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Rivera and Mr. Pedro Court, President of the Insular League of Parent-Teacher Associations, will go. The Commissioner invites other civic and religious entities to also send their representatives to the National Capital. The Campaign Commissioner Mariano Villaronga has addressed all school superintendents urging them to mobilize all teachers and students in their respective districts in the campaign. He requests that all sixth grade teachers send letters, by air mail, to the congregational authorities indicated below. Further requests that all teachers, professionals, civic and religious entities send cables and letters in English as soon as possible. The island's delegates will join NEA and Puerto Rico government officials in Washington to push for full statehood for the island. The "slogan" of the campaign will be: "Under the American flag, in Puerto Rico, one out of every two children is out of the classroom for lack of educational facilities, despite the fact that this country invests one-third of its general budget in education. It will be asked that the children of Puerto Rico, be given the same treatment that children in the United States receive. The Teachers Association will also write a letter to each of the U.S. Congressmen. In this letter they will explain why 800,000 American children born in Puerto Rico should receive the same treatment as those born on the mainland. Mr. José Joaquín Rivera publicly acknowledged the work done by the National Education Association in favor of Puerto Rico. - For two years the Puerto Rican Teachers Association has been fighting for the inclusion of the island as a state, to the extent that, due to the lack of certain statistical data on Puerto Rico, it was not possible in the past to achieve such treatment. At its last annual convention held in Cleveland, however, the NEA unanimously approved the inclusion of Puerto Rico on a parity with the states. The Governor, the Resident Commissioner and the Commissioner of Instruction have been moving to produce the required data since Ms. Mabel Studebaker, president of the NEA, pointed out in EL MUNDO the danger to the island from the measure. The Island would be touched by $4,000,000,. as a possession, and more than $25,000, (Cont. on page 22, Col. 5).
New Rules for Uncertified Lines
New rules for uncertified lines to go into effect as of Monday, JAC disclosed at Vista JAC By RURICO E. RIVERA EL MUNDO Staff Writer i A new regulation governing the activities of uncertified lines is to go into effect as of next Monday. This was announced yesterday by Mr. Eddie Holahan, head of the aviation division of the Transportation Authority, before Mr. William J. Madden, examiner of the Civil Aeronautics Board. This regulation will affect all uncertified airlines, since no airplane will be allowed to leave the Island without first undergoing a rigorous examination by qualified mechanics. The hearings that have been held at the Normandie Hotel since last Monday by the CAB, in connection with the petition of the Government of Puerto Rico to improve air facilities between San Juan and New York, ended yesterday with the testimony of Mr. Holahan, who was presented as a special witness for the CAB. Holahan speaks Eddie Holahan's testimony was based primarily on the activities he has been carrying out with Board officials to establish in Puerto Rico a regulation governing the activities of non-routing airlines. Holahan expressed his belief that the service provided by the lines without a fixed itinerary has "been of great benefit to Puerto Rico, and that it should continue, To this effect, a regulation has been prepared (Cont. on page 14.) Col. 5) Advisory Boards Are Asked To Be Eliminated More than 200 People Attended" School Code Hearings By Benjamin SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer More than 200 mayors, school superintendents, school principals and school officials in general discussed yesterday the proposed draft of the Puerto Rico School Code. The hearings were held publicly in the auditorium of the Ateneo Puertorriqueño, with the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, presiding. The Teachers Association requested that the School Advisory Boards be eliminated from the draft bill and that the position of School Director be maintained "with the powers and faculties it has today..." The school superintendents demanded that they be treated as representatives of the Commissioner of Instruction in their respective districts, and advocated the consolidation of school services? The San Juan principals are calling for a new salary scale with a $125 base and an additional $15 for teachers who have completed 30 post-graduate college credits. The Objections Almost all the representations against the draft bill produced in common the same objections. - Mr. Rizal S. Pagán, school principal of Guayama and vice president of the Puerto Rico School Principals Association, alleged that the draft of the School Code (Cont. on p. 14.- Col. 1).
News Digest
Astor outlines 1040 program for island doctors. Pona studies Bayamon cemetery ditch. - Taft endorsed repeal of law bearing his name. - Displaced German raised a company in the United States for one million dollars. - No dividend will be paid to insured veterans until ol 1051. - The Americans and the English are stepping up their counter-blockade of Berlin. "Sugar workers and sugar producers have not yet reached agreement on a settlement. - Admiral Denfeld came to the island to confer with Barbey on Vieques maneuvers. - - - Margaret Truman denied that she is engaged, o o * Commission of jibaros visited the Governor. ♦ - - Crisis has arisen in the Chinese Government, on the occasion of the proposed relocation of the capital. . * Four new cases of typhoid have arisen in Comerio. - Bruce held conference with Marshall.
They ask for the elimination of the Advisory Boards, of the Preliminary Draft of the School Code, Picó endo*** the plan for the consolidation of the Government's agendas. - - - Tutti Coll and his colleagues pleaded innocence at the arraignment. - - - Soap, cattle and loe granee record sustanctalee declines. - - - The President of the Institute of Rum gave* existo coordination in the announcement* campaign. - - - As of Monday there will be a new* rule* for non-certified* airlines*. - - - An active Insular campaign is organized in favor of the project of aid to the instruedon. - - - Tribute to Ramo* Antonini s* to be held on February 18. ♦ - * Shah Mohammed Reia Fahlevi was wounded by shots fired at him by a reporter-photographer. - * * * Genera! Marshall reported he will shortly return to the United States. e e - Sierra Rerdeeía explained in New York advantages of the Island to eotabiecer new* Industry*.
Picó Endorses Uniting the Agencies
For S. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO, the best opportunity for a complete reorganization of the governmental structure would be the moment when Puerto Rico is authorized to draft its Organic Charter, according to Dr. Rafael Picó, president of the Planning Board. Coinciding with Governor Muñoz Marin's ideas regarding the consolidation of several government agencies, Dr. Picó informed yesterday that in the past, the Planning Board has recommended such action as a means, not necessarily to reduce government services, but to avoid through consolidation the elimination of agencies that now act independently, and that have to report to the Governor. - Practical Results The Chairman of the Planning Board stated that the Board's recommendations have been followed in the past and their practical result has demonstrated the wisdom of such recommendations. He referred to the case of the former Island Park Service, which was consolidated with the Recreation and Sports Commission. He stated that the good performance of the current Parks and Recreation Commission in its administrative operation is a good example of the above. Dr. Picó indicated that if Governor Muñoz Marin, in his message to the Legislature to be convened in February*14, were to make a recommendation for the consolidation of several government agencies, the consolidation could be carried out, even within the framework of the current Organic Charter. However, Dr. Picó added that the ideal time would be when Puerto Rico is authorized to draft its Organic Charter. In keeping with the ideas expressed by Governor Muñoz Marín, Dr. Picó informed that the Planning Board, in its Sixth Economic Program, has recommended such a consolidation. This was done in previous years, and in the Sixth Economic Program, recently completed. In this program mention is made of the need to "reduce the General Expense Budget by eliminating or reducing services which are not of proven necessity, and by reducing overhead items, at such time as the reduction in the prices of the items charged for these items begins. In connection with this possible consolidation of agencies, Governor Muñoz Marin has been working on a plan, as reported yesterday, in line with his ideas expressed in the last press conference held last Monday. It is the opinion of Governor Muñoz Marin that the structure of the Island Government is more complicated than it should be, and in line with this criterion, he has been working on a study to make the functions of the Government simpler and more efficient. -If there are no last minute inconveniences, these recommendations will have to be included in the menu (Cont. in Is. P. 14.- Col. 7).
Marshall to Return to U.S.A. Shortly
~ Amirov ■ A 0 JB HF I 1 k f xSiWii HI ft f Jáí Ib El V Ká W 4 ft ft ft \ -Bp Ha l I ' IBw i - ? ■ ■ ■ J I I b Ib ft E l I I I ÍIH i i i t \ 4^011 fl Bi *■' BHBHBAyw "B ¥ WMiii J ■ j B ' BMBBí aMENR < /W'' S vw* - '■ 8 ' p' ftMB :
The photo captures :m aspect of the Press conference held yesterday, * la* nein of I* afternoon, at General George C. Mar "hall. former Secretary of Retado de Retado" Unldoe, in In reeldend* of Admiral Daniel R. Barbey, commander of the Tenth Naval Diatry. From left and right. Julio Rivera, of Frene* Asociada; Erneeto Cuevas, of El Impardal;
Mathew Kenny, United Press; General Marshall; Jobó Arnaldo Meyners, International News Service; Harwood Hull, WAPA; Juan Lili* Márquez, Puerto Rico Ilustrado; and Benjamin Santana, Leslie Highley and Eliseo Comba* Guerra of EL MUNDO. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Bruce Held Conference With Marshall Oéeae that Argentines Now Seek Friendship From the United States BY s. GALVEZ MATURANA Reactor of RL MUNDO At two o'clock yesterday afternoon the Ambassador of the United States sn Argentina, Jamas Bruce, left for the city of Miami, After remaining on the Island a little more than twenty-four hours, he continued his trip in the clipper that covered flight 22* of the Pan Amerlcan World Airways, on his Itinerary haels the city of Miami. Ambassador Bruce expects to be in the city of Washington on the ninth of the present month of February, by which date he will have an interview with President Truman, in order to give him a report on the situation prevailing in the Argentine Republic. Probable Change of Front Even though Ambassador Brueo, in his brave press conference in San Juan, said that his report to the President would be a routine one, there is speculation in the diplomatic spheres of Washington about the slow but unquestionable change of front in his foreign policy which President Perón of Argentina has begun to put into practice in relation to the United States. This is so, according to the diplomatic* circuits of the federal capital, in view of the desires shown by the Argentine Government to strengthen its international relations with the United States. Before leaving Bueno Aire, Ambassador Bruce held several conferences with President Perón, to which the Argentine Presidency attached great importance. Day* after these conferences President Perón announced that "he would have to revise the Constitution, to keep it in harmony with progress, since in its conception the nineteenth century discovered liberty and our century must offer justice." ' Condenses in February The convention to revise the Argentine Constitution is scheduled to begin in the second week of this month of February (Cont. on p. 14.- Col. 8).
Praised Puerto Rico's Climate. Would Not Comment on International Situation. - Confirmed Truman Recommended Island To Him By Benjamin SANTANA, Editor of EL MUNDO General George C. Marshall, former U.S. Secretary of State, will soon return to the "Continent. During a press conference yesterday he said he was feeling very well and that he had gained five pounds during his stay on the Island.
on the Island. "The Nation's greatest soldier," as President Truman called him when he accepted M mínela as Secretary of State four weeks ago, has been on the Island for 20 days. He arrived in Puerto Rico last January 15, at the direction of President Truman, to spend a season of rest and convalescence after his serious illness. The great strategist and diplomat of World War II, to whom much of the credit for the victory of the United Nations is given, declined to comment on the international situation. "I feel Pound" When asked by one of the reporters to comment on the international situation, the five-star general quickly replied that he had nothing to say on the matter. "I feel Ubre now and without obligations after leaving the State portfolio," he said. He added that he was retired from active duty and that his intention to remain retired was firm. He has no definite plans* for the future. *He said, repeating again that he was "over" and that this allowed him "to enjoy the privilege of not having to worry. He has rested a lot General Marshall said that "he felt very well in health, that he had rested a lot and that the climate of the island had made him very well, "Puerto Rico is a charming country," he said, praising the beauty of our landscape" and the salubriousness of our temperature. These pleasant conditions," according to him, make the island an ideal place for rest and tranquility. He confirmed that it was President Truman himself who recommended him to spend this season in Puerto Rico, a few days after having undergone a delicate surgical operation at Walter Reed Hospital. The President visited him, by surprise (Cont. on p. 14.- Col. 8).
"It is not expected that the dividend for World War II veterans will be paid before 1951 or 1952, according to Dr. Serra Chavarry, director of the Veterans Administration for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, yesterday. Dr. Serra Chavarry stated, "It has been legislated that every World War II veteran who has had National Service life insurance in force for a reasonable period of time will participate in a dividend to be paid at a future date. "The central office of the Veterans Administration in Washington is at present making organizational and operational arrangements for the payment of the dividend to all World War II veterans who have had National Service life insurance in force. "It is not expected that the dividend can be paid before the year 195! or 1952 because of the many arrangements that have to be made for the preparation of personnel which will take some time." Dr. Serra Chavarry assures that every Puerto Rican veteran who* has remained in his National Service life insurance for a period of time not yet specified will receive his share of the dividend in cash. "The regional office of the Puerto Rico Veterans Administration is not organizing any unit to engage in dividend payments" because it has not received instructions to that effect," he added. The amount of the dividend* that will be paid to Puerto Rican veterans* could not be specified.
Graciela Rivera Succeeds In Opera Lucia In Ñapóles
Miss Marta Teresa Cabrera, who is currently studying singing in Milan, has written to her parents. *Mr. Rafsel Cabrera Torres and his wife, about the triumphs of 1* Puerto Rican diva Graciela Rlvora. The paragraphs of his letter, dated Sunday, January 22nd, referring to Graciela, read as follows: "Last Saturday I heard Graciola Rivera on the radio in Lucia da Lammormoor, with the following singers of La Scala in Milan: Lulggl Infantino, tenor; Enzo Mascherini, baritone, and Ner, bass. "I know the baritone very well. He is magnificent. Graciela has been a great success. The romanza of La Pazzia. and the Cavatina of the first act were very applauded. I think Graciola is a musical intelligence. I spoke on the radio when they said: "Nápolos y .(Cent, sn la P. 14,- Col, 1).
GRACIELA RIVERA
Astor Plots 1949 Program For Island Physicians
The President of the 1* Medical Association, Dr. Manuel A. Altor, has addressed the "associates", outlining the program to be developed in 1949. Dr. A "tnr expresses his gratitude to his fellow members for having re-elected him to the presidency, indicating that "we will do everything in our power to duly fulfill our obligations to the medical class and to the community in general. The President of the Medical Association further states: "We can do little or nothing, however, if we are unable to obtain the full support of our membership, and even of those colleagues who for one reason or another remain distant from the Association, to ensure that the program which we do not want to implement, will be implemented in the best possible way.
the program which we have not* drawn up can be carried out with absolute fidelity." According to *1 program. "*I propose the Medical Association, to stimulate all Puerto Rican physicians to join its* ranks, to give greater strength, unity and cohesion to the collectivity, and to develop "a true leadership, both at the insular and municipal levels." Another purpose of the program is to hold meetings as frequently as possible to continue to foster scientific development and to keep the enrollment constantly aware of the most recent advances in 1* medical science, so that such advances" may be promptly applied in the best care and .(Cont, at 1*, Pg. lá.- Col 4,
Four Typhoid Cases Emerge In Comerio Investigators Trying To Locate Carrier. There are 16 cases* in Patillas By LUIS HERNANDEZ AQUINO Editor of EL MUNDO Four new* cases* of typhoid fever, - one positive and tree "oipechoso*. - have "urged in the town of Comerlo, where >in original outbreak, started on December 14th, produced 80 cases* and "two deaths*". The Bureau of Epidemiology has initiated a dramatic search for the carrier of this disease in that town, reminiscent of the classic case in the annals of American medicine, related to Mary Mallon, known as Typhoid Mary, the New York cook who caused 1,351 cases of this disease between 1901 and 1907 in New York. There is even a possibility that -1 outbreak in Patillas may have originated *in the d* Comerlo, a "unt© that has under study *! Researcher of Transmlslble Diseases of the Department of Health, Mr. Sebastión A. Diaz. He is in Comerío Mr. Díaz, "alió yesterday for Commerce on the occasion d* the new cases arisen* in that population. According to *1 Director of the Bureau of Epidemiology, Dr. Abel de Juen, the carrier of the original outbreak has not yet been found. It is understood that there was a carrier, who worked during the months of October and November with 59 other farmers in tobacco fields in Comerio adjacent to a creek that was contaminated with the feces of the carrier, and whose waters were used by other affected persons, since they supplied the aqueduct. It is presumed qu* the carrier *was ambulant*, because d*"*r d* there, would have "urged the outbreak prior to the date indicated. As the farmers who worked in the logging were from other places, we are trying to locate them one by one to take samples and thus determine which one is the carrier. A typhoid fever carrier is a person who has suffered from typhoid fever and who has become a carrier by passing the bacillus in his feces. There are intermittent carriers, or "*a, who paaai *1 bacillus out of their organisms seasonally; there are transient carriers, (Cont. *on P. 14.- Col. 2).
No Agreement Reached On Wage Rates
APA and Laborers* Meet Tuesday Parties have been unable to reconcile their views. - APA meets Thursday Without being able to reach an agreement on the workers' wage demands, the negotiations between the Sugar Producers Association, the Sugar Union and the Free Federation were suspended, with a view to the signing of the collective bargaining agreement for the 1040 harvest. Although during the days of Wednesday and Thursday, workers and employers of the sugar industry discussed the clause on wages of the contract, nothing concrete has been agreed upon. Discussions will resume on Tuesday on the wages clause; and it is expected, according to the opinion of spokesmen for both sides, that the talks will then enter a critical period, given the position assumed by the representatives of the employers and the workers," Withdrawal of Demands The workers withdrew their demand that they be granted a share in the profits of the center," withdrawing also their demand that "the unions be paid ten cents" for each quintal of sugar produced, to create a charitable fund. The withdrawal of this demand "is conditioned on the employers" paying insurance policies to each worker. But on the other hand, one of the workers' representatives said yesterday that the withdrawal of such demands is not final, and that they can be made at any time during negotiations. Both on the wage demands and on the classification of workers, the parties have not been able to agree. Nor have they agreed on other fundamental clauses* of the contract, so it is felt that "there is a stalemate in the negotiations," even though the negotiations are taking place in an atmosphere of camaraderie and goodwill. The joint labor unity committee, composed of representatives of the FLT and the Union, held a meeting to consider the current status of the negotiations. The meeting also considered on "sti meeting 1o .related to the "lesson*". *in the Santa Juan* and Juncos Centrals, to determine the union" which has the majority of the workers. At the end of this joint meeting, the executive committee of the CGT Inc. met in special session in its local. Although this meeting was held behind closed doors, it was reported that the meeting also considered the status of the labor-management agreement negotiations. It also discussed the position to be taken by the CGT INE. regarding the demand made in Washington by its General Secretary, Mr. Armando Rlvero, that the minimum wages set for the industry on the mainland be extended to Puerto Rico. APA So R*un* The Board of Directors of the Sugar Producers' Association is to meet next Monday to hear *1 report of the Labor Committee, which agreed with the labor organization, *1 collective bargaining agreement for the 1949 crop, as reported yesterday, it is probable that the sugar producers will appoint a committee to confer with filler Theodor* F. Gr*"n .around* the proposed legislation to *atabl*c*r "n the league a minimum wage of 75 cents an hour, in industries bought* out of interstate commerce. Senator Groen, as you know, has been on the island since last September as a guest of Governor Luia Muñoz Marín, who invited him to visit the island to assess on the ground the economic and social problems confronting the island, and the true situation of agriculture, industry and commerce. V Approved clause* For the discussion of the collective agreement for this year's harvest, the Libro Federation, the Sugar Union and several independent unions reached an agreement to negotiate it with the Aooeíaelón of Sugar Producers of the island. Among the clauses* "proven ex la* converMdon** calateada* huta 1* facha -- find the* one* that* establishes ol workshop unlonad* for 1* fas* factory of 1* industry and 1* do appearance.
MICH DISBURSEMENTS BY THE GOVERNMENT . ' I Loo dstsnibolsM ImoÍim ti day 8 do February 104* by the Government of Fort Rleo reached - 1* amount of M17.ML08, aegúit biformaoióft Bumlnietrad* by te oficia* do! . Auditor. Lo* desembote** by group* d* fund* dlTM*n aaí: General fund, 81I8AM81: fund* espute!**, $88408.08: foxdos de proyeetoe de construeclón, *35,571.85: fondee de Capital Industrial, 85434.47; fund* do empresas de Servicio Público, $15541185: fund* en fldeleomlso y munteipetoe, 83X1804.71 Total M1T401.0I.