THE DAILY MIINDO MARAÑA
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Patchy to occasional B to C, partly cloudy, with some scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, U degrees: low, -75 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:M ds this afternoon, N.M inches do mercury. i M A - - - - - u _ . . v.
NEW YORK. juHo 1. (PU) - Temperature of e*t* afternoon in the* United" State*: New York, 76; Chicago, $4; Wéahlngton, 76: Miami, 6". Forecast for* m*fian* at I* New* York City: cloudy tomorrow morn, clearing I* afternoon; temperature higher, about eighty; wind* moderate* from the east.
YEAR XXX
S®***** second class matter. Post Office, San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 2, 1949.
NUMBER 13712
FIVE CENTS
Police Asked To Be Prudent About Plates . r - - - ■
Only 48% of Cars Obtain License * Interior Says It Does Not Wish* To Create Crisis Now Chasing Drivers By S, Galve* Will Kill* Editor of EL MUNDO Gives an estimated 57,00(1 vehicle! registered with the Department of 1o Interior, s* has dispatched as of yesterday, a total of 27,349 license plates. The Commissioner of the Interior, Sefton Jorge Jimenez, informs that he has recommended to the Legislature measures to correct a problem that is repeated every year, "due to the apathy of the vehicle owners to remove the license plates within the term established by the Automobile Law". Although the law in force," said Mr. Jimenez, "does not authorize the Commissioner of the Interior to extend the date for the novation of licenses, the fact that only 48 percent have obtained their license plates could hinder the normal development of activities in Puerto Rico and paralyze the transit of 52 percent of the vehicles on the island. z The Commissioner of the Interior added that "there is also a number of vehicles that the Department does not know about, due to the method in which the payment of the license plates is made at the island's collector's offices, whose owners have paid the amount of their license plates in accordance with the law," and indicated that "in view of this uncertain situation, he considers it prudent to wait a few days, Commissioner Jimenez stated that since this is a recurring problem, an amendment to the current automobile law is necessary, so that the issuance of license plates is simultaneous with the payment of the same, ■ The Commissioner also stated that the law should be amended to allow the issuance of license plates to be simultaneous with the payment of the same, ■ The Commissioner stated that the law should be amended to allow the issuance of license plates to be simultaneous with the payment of the same, ■ The Commissioner also stated that the law should be amended to allow the issuance of license plates to be simultaneous with the payment of the same. It is proposed to recommend to the Governor legislative action to that effect, during the next ordinary assembly of the Legislature. Another amendment to be recommended is that the Commissioner of the Interior be empowered to issue provisional licenses for a term not to exceed 30 days at the beginning of the fiscal year, for those trucks engaged exclusively in the transportation of cane or the product of other seasonal industry, which normally draw shingles for half of the fiscal year.The Commissioner of the Interior believes that in this way "a similar situation which has arisen this year could be dealt with, since due to the strike in the cane industry, approximately 100,009 tons of sugar remain to be processed, whose owners will be forced to pay for their license plates in order to use the trucks for the days remaining before the end of the harvest. In addition to this comment, and referring to a study carried out by the Agricultural Economics Department of the Experimental Station and by the Department of the Interior, Mr. Jimenez said that "truck transportation is being used inefficiently by the sugar mills", "I dare say", he said, "that a large part of the approximately 2,000 trucks used exclusively for the transportation of sugar cane during the harvest would not be needed if there were an efficient transportation organization. "These 2,000 with an average value of $4,000 represent a partially unnecessary expenditure of eight million dollars ds Capital investment, which could be used in other new Industries to help solve the critical unemployment problem. "The fact that a truck cannot give more than one trip many times to central id, leads the owner of the truck to overload it, thus deteriorating his vehicle and the road, besides being a danger on the roads. - The Commissioner of the Interior concluded by informing that it was "unconscionable the attitude of a PA, HPA, CP A vehicle owner who stops taking his license plates to tlemoo for not paying $1.00 for said license plate" and for the protection of his person and passage that the insurance of the $29 or $49 that he is obliged to pay, I provide". It is difficult to understand why commercial and private vehicles and trucks engaged in the transportation of cargo during the year have not provided the money for the payment of their license plates with the same zeal as they do economy for the purchase of the fuel that moves their vehicles. 5
Juano Hernandez Returns to the Island . )
Says He Wants To Teach Art Here. A New Film Starts on the 25th By Luís Ránche* Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO After having given a triumphant demonstration of his extraordinary artistic skills in Hollywood, the notable Puerto Rican actor Juano Hernández is back in Puerto Rico. Fully satisfied with the magnificent work done in front of the film cameras, Juano LieXó to San Juan yesterday at * eight o'clock in the morning, coming from New York, on a trip from Los Angeles, California, with a stopover in that city. We interviewed Hernandez yesterday at his home, a few hours after his arrival. We surprised him in his bathing suit and he explained that he had taken advantage of a downpour to go to the patio with his son Juan José "and bathe in the rain". After changing clothes, we chatted with the actor, who seems to be satisfied to be back in Puerto Rico with his loved ones. The artist's personality impresses us, but his "mena" conversation, his modesty and the self-confidence that his whole presence manifests, makes us look at him (Cont. on page 14, Col. 1).
-r . - J B M| fe -w ■ si a ? w-B WaSWr? fl W w vi 1 * ■> B B w 7 ' m < f y ■Mi y v u / TuV- - w js mi EUIN BBBBuBBMHMlBBSk7 - BBBI. .BHb i
Puerto Rican actor Juano Hernandez, whose* performance in Hollywood has won praise from 1* critics*, is the subject of a thrill at his home in Hato Rey, * upon his arrival* * I* Island, from the United* States. Hernandes will return to the Nortp on the 25th of this year to make a film film film (Photo EL MUNDO).
J AC Reports Punta Salinas Disaster Establishes Overweight Was 2,473 Pounds. - Prepares Final Report Jamas F. Cunningham WASHINGTON, July 1" (PU)-' The Civil Aeronautics Board said today that its investigation indicated that the Strato Freight plane that carried 53 Puerto Ricans to their deaths was carrying a 2,473-pound overload when it crashed within miles of Punta Salinas, June 7. In a "preliminary statement of facts" about the crashed C-48, the Board said this fact was established at public hearings held in San Juan last week, promising to issue a final report on probable cause. A Board spokesman said the final report could be ready in a few weeks** or two months* from now. Mechanic Saw It In today's report, the board said a "certified mechanic" inspected the aircraft the evening before the accident, finding it airworthy. "Shortly before midnight," he continued, "75 passengers, including four infantrymen, boarded the aircraft, which was loaded with 1,118 pounds of baggage and 7,118 pounds of fuel and oil. "The Investigation indicated that at the time of takeoff from San Juan, the gross weight of the aircraft was 47,473 pounds, or 2,473 in excess of the permissible weight." The Preliminary Report does not mention the alleged spark plug defect mentioned during the hearings in ! San Juan. Describing the aircraft's last flight, the Report states; "The engines and operation of the aircraft were reported normal after inspection. "But immediately after takeoff from 1* runway 27,"- it adds - "the right engine began to lose power. An emergency was declared and runway 9 was prepared for a landing. Could Not Maintain Altar* "The crew stated that the plane had reached an altitude of approximately 300 feet, and as the airspeed was extremely low, it could not maintain altitude. The flight continued forward, crashing the plane about 200 yards from 1* beach, at Punta (Cont. on page 14. Col. 4>
Descartes Authorizes Provisional Insurance Contract To Govern For 30 Days For Further Study of the Matter In order to insure public employees and officials, on July 1, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico entered into a provisional contract with four insurance companies which had been previously rejected by him at the auction (eHund" "on June 17).
} by him. The contract will be in effect for a term of 30 days, extendable until- । the 90 days from July 1. . The insurance rate resulting from the auction to be held prior to the expiration of the aforementioned 90-day period will apply. According to information supplied to the Press by Treasurer Descartas, the above-mentioned period has been fixed, among other reasons, in view of the request made by the Surety Association of the United States to the Superintendent of Insurance, for the purpose of having sufficient time to "examine past experience and present situation" in order to "propose probable new rates". The other reason given is based on the conclusion of the Treasurer, who has been studying the situation with the cooperation of the Superintendent of Insurance, the Puerto Rico Auditor's office and the Attorney General's office. It has been determined that "it is in the best public interest that the Government also have more time than that which has elapsed since the auction was held until June 30 to examine all aspects" of the problem. The resolution, adopted on June 29, expresses in its operative part: "THEREFORE, and in order to accomplish the purposes enumerated above, the Treasurer of P. R. determines that it is in the public interest to enter into a provisional contract with the Porto Ritan and American Insurance Company or Companies, Gycat American Indemnity Co, Maryland Casualty Company and Fidelity and Deposit Co. of Maryland, for the purpose* of procuring the Schedule Bond in accordance with the pro forma submitted by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico for the purpose* of the auction, and which shall be in force for a term of thirty (30) days, extendable up to ninety (90) days, from the date of July 1, 1949, and shall be in force for a term of thirty (30) days, extendable up to ninety (90) days, from the date of July 1, 1949, and shall be in force for a term of thirty (30) days, extendable up to ninety (90) days, from the date of July 1, 1949. July 1, 1949, and for the purposes of this provisional contract, the insurance rate resulting from the auction which in accordance with the law shall be held on any date prior to the expiration of the ninety (90) days referred to above shall govern. The premium I for this transitional period shall be collected on a pro rata basis.
Géigel Polanco Had A Very Busy Day Yesterday He Gave Special Attention / To The Gómez Case. By Juan Martins Chapal Editor of EL MUNDO ' It was an extremely busy day yesterday as Acting Governor, the Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco. At half past eight in the morning he entered his office at the Department of Justice, where he remained until nine o'clock giving instructions. At nine o'clock he arrived at La Fortaleza with all the serenity and disposition of a veteran executive. He held a conference with Mr. Roberto de Jesús, head of the Budget Bureau. He learned about, studied and approved the breakdown of several budgets, which were "balloted by the Legislature. These budgets were to come into effect yesterday. He then received Mr. Wilson P. Colberg, grand Marshall of the Fourth of July Parade. Various points i in connection with that act were discussed. . Near noon the Acting Attorney General and Special Prosecutor, Jose C. Aponte, and his assistant, Guillermo Gil, arrived. Many matters of justice were discussed. 1 Gomez Case Discussed The three had lunch at Fortaleza and during lunch the conference continued. The most important issue was related to new angles । that may lead to the clarification of the Gómez case in Mayagüez. Gil was entrusted with the new investigation, which began immediately. The Acting Governor is of the opinion that there is a clue, which seems to be certain. For h farde he conferred with the lawyers Gustavo Cruzado Pujols and William Santana, municipal judges of Rio Piedras. To these magistrates he speaks (Cont. on page 14, Col. 3) i
El Gordo Falls in Corozal a
The Ticket, Which Was Separated, Was Distributed Later Among Poor People of the Population
By E. RAMIREZ BRAU EL MUNDO Staff Writer The $250,000 Island Lottery jackpot fell in Corozal and was distributed among the poor. The winning ticket had been separated by Mr. Juan Negrón, from the Cibuco neighborhood. Not being able to buy it all, the agent Ramón Rivera Mediavilla, owner of the agency 413, kept half of it. Then Rivera sold the half ticket among different poor people, and Mr. Negrón also did the same, keeping only 10 or 12 pieces, according to Mr. Jesús M. Benitez, administrator of the Lottery. At* eight o'clock yesterday morning, the courting began, and ended at 1:30 P. M. Before that time, the lottery was held in the city. M. Before that time, the jury formed by the Reverend Juan Manuel Ma-
draso, who acted as president: the representative to the Chamber, Miss María Libertad Gómes; Carlos Tallada, Felipe Prudsncio and Pedro Sánchez Salesar. Mr. Jesús M. Benítez, sdministrsdorde la Lotería, supervised from very early in the morning all the operations related to the introduction of the bolos corresponding to numbers and prizes, in the two balloons, closing one the reverend Madraso and the other the representative Miss María Libertad Gómez. Gordo Salid Primtro The gordo, of $250,000 was the first big jackpot to come out, at 11:03 A.M. The jackpot, of $250,000, was the first big jackpot to come out, at 11:03 A. The jackpot was sold in Corozal by agent Ramon Rivera Mediavilla. The last prize was the fifth prize of $10,000. This prize came out almost at the end of the drawing.
At 12:35 P. M. the $50,000 prize was drawn. Mrs.* Gala Hernández de Pibón, owner of the 615 agency in Cataño, sold the third prize of $25,000. At no time during the drawing was there any incident* of any kind. The event was held normally, and the public admired the speed with which the drawing was carried out. The sworn Carlos Tallada, subjaf* of the Automobile Department, had acquired a billata that was very close to the jackpot. Our correspondent Naranjito, Mr. José Antonio Rivera, sent a taltffráfico dispatch last night reporting that part of the lottery jackpot was sold in that town. He adds that among the winners* of the jackpot are many poor people, parents. i
TA Considers Ceding Fernandez Juncos Route To Carros and Gugu aguitas
UPR Suggests Improvements for Radio Broadcasting I Study Points to Lack of Programs to Raise the Level of Culture By Luis Hernández Aquino EL MUNDO Staff Writer In the study on radio in Puerto Rico" conducted by the Teaching Council, it is concluded that most of the radio programs that are broadcast "only reach the less educated part of the population, and that more programs are needed to raise the cultural level of this sector of the population. It is recommended to advertisers that they should not allow themselves to be excessively advertised to and that they should demand that the advertisements that are propagated to them be clear, brief, correct in linguistic expression, and free of unpleasant exaggerations. The Higher Council of Education has been conducting the above-mentioned study for a long time. Several of its employees visited radio stations, where they held interviews with directors and staff. They also tuned in for a long time to the programs of the various stations in order to arrive at the corresponding conclusions. The objectives of the study were to suggest means of correcting the principal defects of radio broadcasting in Puerto Rico; to develop in the listening public the ability to appreciate radio programs critically; and to suggest to owners, management personnel and program sponsors some means of presenting better programs. It is also ■ proposed by the Higher Council to point out means of using 1" radio as a thought-stimulating, morale-boosting, art-disseminating, and popular education agency as well as ii making available to the public methods and techniques which will enable them to evaluate critically the claims of propaganda and to maintain a sensible and vigilant attitude toward it. This study took into account, "as reported in the study, the complications involved in an institution such as radio in Puerto Rico, where the industry is poor, is limited in properly trained radio talent and is faced with the problem of pleasing an audience mostly of low cultural level, and an educated minority. The study covers the history of radio; the operation of radio in different countries; voice and speech; the "commercial nuncio; news programs; children's programs in their educational and entertainment aspects; miscellaneous programs; and general recommendations to stations. General Conclunlonc" The Consejo Superior do Enseñan- I za reaches 27 conclusions in its 1 study, among which are the following: Manuscripts should be improved from a literary point of view, as many programs are improvised in c'l studio or are written in haste; more genuinely humorous programs are needed, as many so-called humorous programs are an insubstantial play on words, not always of the best taste; and the lack of greater originality in the presentation of programs. | (Cont. on page 14, Col. 8)
\The Government has given the green light to installment sales. To Make Convenient Installment Purchases NEW YORK/July 1. M. today as far as Mrs. William Vonderleith is concerned. At that time, Mrs. Von- , derleith and all other housewives in the pals were given the green light - from the Government, at least-- । to return to the prewar practice of paying all things . " comfortable installments. The consumer credits which were in effect for eight . years, and which prevented (anta i people like Mr." Vonderleith i - take "n items on installments, were - repealed by Congress. The con- ■ < glossists received a vote of - thanks, on behalf rie all - the" ámas da rasa, from Mrs. Vonderleith. She has not yet spoken-! - do with her husband, but the family presu- ¡ - post is going back " au - pre-war system, and she is- - about to start buying - ' things under the one dollar system - suddenly, one dollar a week. Benefits Quo Aporta ' The lifting of the controls. ' 1 she said, was like handing millions } of dollars to her and all the other housewives who were economizing during the gue1 na. Now she will have, she said, a recep- -¡ (Cont. on page 14. Col. 4r ¡ i ' - Preparations for Governor's 1 1 1 Visit 1 1 1 1 Announce Muñoz To See President Truinan in Washington WASHINGTON, July 1 (Special to ET, WORLD)-- The office <!I office in Washington today began to arrange a program for the visit of Governor Muñoz Marin, who will arrive in Washington on Monday afternoon, July 4, lio. The Governor's ship will dock in New York at eight o'clock Monday morning, it was reported, and Muñoz will continue on to Washington late the same day. | As part of the activities planned for the Governor, an official reception will be held by the Puerto Rico Bureau, to which members of the Senate and House and officials of the Federal Government will be invited. It is not known how long the President's stay will be, but it is presumed to be about two weeks, in view of his long stay on the national stage. It is understood that one of the Governor's first "oto's" will be a visit to the White House to confer with President Truman. Governor Muñoz Marin has previously been invited to speak at the National Holiday Club. The ' Club's weekly luncheons, however, are suspended ' ' in the hot season, and it is du- , } doso that they will be resumed for aho "a i ¡ due to the fact that the Club's Auditorium | I lacks acjndlcionado air equipment. j
i B 1 I ' I ' I \"Ir JE ■ t >1 "i < , . . - ta H Ai f ' s HP® j R a . ' ' ' gSM . 1: A Father Juan M. Madraso, president of I* Board that *cüió yesterday in he extraordinary northo of 1* Lottery, ■ Inspects one of the balloons containing lo* bolos, "omento* before* empesar the draw.
It would be from San Juan to Martín Peña The President of the CSP I Observed Deficiencies - Public For José M. GARCÍA' CALDERON Editor of EL MUNDO L" Autoridad rio Transporte esti j ! I" public transportation between Martin Peña and San Lu "n by I" route rie 1" Avent" ¡ i da Fernandez Juncos, in the hands* rie 1o" porters who operate "piaicorre" guaguitas and eutomóvl-, les with capacity to give pass-' je ros or less. As reported yesterday -! lawyer Joige V. Toledo. President of the Public Service Commission") in addition to the plsicorre and lo* automobiles rie tourism, it is contemplated to authorize " to transit between Martin ( Peña and San Juan, by Fernández Juncos,- one or two guagua* Indei pending,s. s The President rie the CSP said also that yesterday morning "- | | had noticed some" deflcien-i das in the service of transport- I I ción between Martin Peña and San . Juan, pnr the Avenida Fernandez | 'Juncos, but that immediately t ' I had made the corresponding notification in 1" Transportation Authority, which sent at the time to the route mentioned", some . of its" buses Discontinued Service Yesterday a large number of the* I । gviagua" small and automobile** í I that travel between San Juan and Rio | ! Piedra" had to discontinue service because they had not received the certificate of convenience and necessity required of the carriers to operate in the metropolitan area. As a result of the closure of this vehicle, many people on their way to work were forced to stop and rest, waiting for transportation. The total number of applications from operators in the metropolitan area filed with the Public Service Commission was 698, and the number of Certificates of Convenience and Necessity granted was 167. The Public Service Commission proposes to authorize the operation of only 200 carriers between the Martin Peña and San Juan routes, La Canter and San Juan, and the Puerto Nuevo and Caparra roads, San Juan. The permits* or certificates for I the operators that will serve the I । route between La Cantera and San Juan, I are being issued" on a provisional basis. Subsequently, the j Commission will decide "l leave them or pe- I ranrio permanently o st rie- I he canceled certificates. As in the previous three" days,] the Public Service Commission was yesterday congested with public rie- ] co. Many por- I porters" were moving from one side to the other asking to be informed of the 1" resolution in their" I cases. . The strenuous work carried out by the Cnml- I alón rie Public Service, ended! with 1" resistance rie rio* Inspecto-1 res struggling in the experiiep-B leo rie the soheituries, sienrio ceased to take them in haste rion- 1 rie a doctor. The entire staff of the Commission! was busy yesterday working on the care of a mountain of cases of petitioners! | The Commission's staff was yesterday working on a mountain of cases of petitioners rie certifica-! rios rio Convenience and Necessity! which are still unresolved. Applications Reach M0 The number of applications rie per"! sonas who purchased nutomobilesllll and licensed them on or after* ]rie April 1' rio 1949, increased yesterday,] to 820. However, most of these cases were being resolved! favorably for the applicants, because they were rielicense rie transfers" rio vehicles which had been replaced. ! In the cases of carriers in the metropolitan area, several certificates have been denied because the petitioners gave false information when filling out the applications. One case was discovered in which the petitioner was a driver for the Transportation Authority, and another case in which the petitioner turned out to be a merchant. Others, as In-H formed, are persons who, despite! having licensed vehicles, have other means of livelihood or have another vehicle, some of these cases will be referred to the Cn-! mission of the Interior for appropriate action. The order of the Public Service Commission paralyzing the movement of the pitlcorroB buses from Rio Piedras to San Juan via Fernández Juncos, provoked displeasure among the numerous public who were forced to travel in the atheist buses of the Transportation Authority. An editor of this newspaper was able to confirm this protest yesterday, when he saw "numerous pardoners signaling to every bus that passed by their side and roasting when they did not stop to pick them up". Also this drafter could e*"H (Cont. on p. 14. Col. 6) '■
Treasurer I ' ■ Raises Case I Marijuana ?. Not Enough Staff Now
Along With Federal Judge Will Go to Governor. Explains Current Process By M. NIEVES RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The Federal Court and the Island Treasury Department will submit the matter related to the au. ge that has taken the violation of " the Iryc* of narcotics and drugs, specinlmcntc marijuana, both "1 Federal Government and "I Governor of Puer o Rico. This was reported to " EL MUNDO by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol Luí* Descartes, when questioned yesterday in connection with the " p "tlclpation that the Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Narcotics of the Treasury Department is taking in the marijuana matter. Only Two Agents* in Marijuana Matter I When asked how many agents of the said Bureau are in charge of the marijuana matter, the official made the following statements: "The Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Narcotics of the Treasury Department, due to personnel limitations, has only two agents permanently assigned to the task of enforcing compliance with the Narcotics Act (Harri.When necessary, when the officers of the Narcotics Division deem it advisable to conduct raids or investigations with a greater number of officers, they are assigned on an ad hoc basis. 1 "The Treasurer of Puerto Rico and the Chief of the Alcoholic Beverages and Narcotics Department of the Treasury Department are very conscious of the fact that they are understaffed to carry out the extensive investigative work required to prosecute not only marijuana but also other narcotics and narcotic drugs. 1 "Recently, a meeting was held at the Treasurer's office with r*j>rgMnt "ntM from 1" the office of the Federal Court Fltc "l and the Puerto Rican Parliament of Justice. "At the meeting we reviewed the situation concerning the violation of the narcotics and mailhuana laws, it being agreed that jointly the authorities of the Federal Court and the] Department of Ha. rienda were to " present the case both to the Federal Government and to the Governor of Puerto Rico." Intervene in Sel* Case* When questioned as to the marijuana cases in which the Bureau rie Beverages and Narcotics has intervened, Mr. Descartes stated that "by law the Bureau intervenes in all marijuana cases. having intervened in six cases during May and June, 1949." Regarding the procedure used in these cases, the Treasury Secretary explained that if the Police report and acquire evidence of a violation, then an affidavit is obtained from the members of that force who intervened in the case or cases which are the object of the report. The same procedure is followed if it is the agents of the Beverage and Narcotics Bureau who intervened in the violation, the Treasurer said. He added that affidavits are also taken from the accused and from the persons who in one way or another may have been involved in the matter. The alleged violators are then brought before the Federal Commissioner. i W is the one who sets bail and orders ¡ incarceration until bail is posted. The case is then referred to "1 Federal Prosecutor, with a report from the Beverage Negoclate, signed by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico. ! i Upon being questioned on "I so liei (Cont. on page 14, Col, 6>