THE M1ND
WEATHER FORECAST!!! WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy, with scattered showers*. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low, 7" degrees*. Barometric pressure at sea level, at é:SO this afternoon, 29.06 inches mercury.
NEW YQRX. agoato 5. (FU). - This afternoon m regtatragon the "iguientaa temperature: Chicago, 88; Miami. 87; New York. M; Washington, 82. Forecast** for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: Weather mostly sunny; humidity haJa continued; temperature highest between loa M.
MARAÑA JOURNAL
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Poet Office. San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 6, 1949
NUMBER 13746
FIVE CENTS
N.G. Maneuvers End With Parade
Governor Delivered Trophies, Reviewed Troops Under Downpour - Then Continued on to Arecibo By Rurlco E. Rivera EL MUNDO Staff Writer Under a light but persistent downpour, Governor Lula Muftoz Ma rln reviewed yesterday, in his capacity as Commander in Chief of the Puerto Rico National Guard, some 1,709 men stationed at the Tortuguero camp in Vega Baja. The governmental retinue, composed in addition to the Governor and his wife, Mrs. Inés María Mendoza de Muñoz Marín, by Colonel Alberto ArrlHága, military aide to the Executive, and Captain Alberto Guerrero, special assistant to the Colonel of the Island Police, arrived at the camp shortly after noon, under a heavy downpour. He was received by Commander General Luis Raul Esteves and his staff, composed of Colonels Wilson P. Colberg, Juan Cesar Cordero, Harry R. Simmons, and William T. Fitts, Carlos F. Muñoz, and Lieutenant Colonels Ren* Esteves, Generoso Vazquez, Jose M. Calderon, and Rafael Gimenez de la Rosa. Salute of 17 Cgflonaio* The Governor then moved to the headquarters, where he was saluted by the CompaAla K, of Ceiba, of the 295th Infantry, commanded by Captain Alejo Rivera Morales. A 17-gun salute was fired as the Governor's march was played. Then the governmental retinue passed to the officers' dining room, where a Creole lunch was served. 1 Fas* Review and Presentation of Trophies ■ Near three o'clock in the afternoon, the Governor moved to the parade ground, where numerous officers and troops were waiting for him, ready to march in your honor. Present at the parade with the Governor were General Esteves, General Edwin L. Sibert, Senate President Samuel K Quiñones, House Speaker Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl, Colonel Alberto Arrlllaga, military aide to the Governor, and Special Assistant of the Folíela Insular, Captain Alberto Guerrero. The Elsenhower trophy, donated by the former Chief of Staff of the United States Army, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, was presented by the Governor to Company A of the 296th, commanded by Captain Luis A. Torres. This trophy is awarded to the best National Guard company in each state of the Union, Company A being one of the first to receive the trophy. Company K of the 295th received two trophies for outstanding military activities during the year. General Esteves presented one of the trophies and the Governor presented the other. They were received by Captain Alejo Rivera Mótales. This company is from Ceiba, Most Distinguished Soldier Immediately the Governor proceeded to present a trophy to the soldier who most distinguished himself during the year in his military activities. General Edwin L. Sibert, head of the Military Department of the Aq-J tillas, awarded a trophy to Company H. of the 296th, commanded by Captain J. E. Bonilla. Large Audience A large audience watched the ceremonies in the rain. Fighter Planes of the National Guard (Cont. on page 14. Col. 6).
Will Not Grant Drivers' Petition
Muñoz Says TA Should Be Upheld Explains Analysis Of' Transportation In Metropolitan Area By Juan Martina* Chapa! ' Editor of EL MUNDO The Government will not be rie ace", dnr/ *■ rH llclón of c l er,0 " porte", dore" public", that "e Je" allowed to compete with 1" Authority do Ji "n "porte in Ja metropolitan zone or else l 0 Go to a huela" r| next Monday. )( The Governor yesterday stated that a democratic government cannot give in to pressure or coercion from a group of citizens, no matter how "im;'í:'í:" it may be, in ""n aX He made it public that the Government is obliged " to support the right of the Transportation Authority to use the roads of the metropolitan area, in -nrm" that does not represent a loss for the government's exa ARencía. because the amounts lost" when there was free competition, "|. canz.aban to half a million dollars rpg ' "Farrier that money represents having 300 teachers" less and leaving "in school twelve thousand children; or "Henifica served of milk less for forty thousand children; or stop "limeni "r eleven thousand children in canteens tacolare"; or ilgnlflr" the soitenlmtanto rie rioiclenta" cam"" less" in hospitals." The Most JtaneficJoso The seftor Muftoz Marín made an anállai" faithful problem of 1s trenaportación rie passengers in the metropolitan area coming to the conclusion that the most henéflcioao for <"l people in general is 1" current situation. The Governor asked the Chófej tes to study the reasons why the Legislature and the Executive chose the current laws and regulations, among the alternatives they had to choose. Regarding the strike threat, the Governor issued the following statement: "A group of public car owners, some of whom traveled through the metropolitan area, have considered the possibility of provoking an automobile strike" "if free transit of public cars through the metropolitan area is not reauthorized. Now "ivveq j to that zone public car", mainly PA's, when they have the permission of le Comlaión rie Servido Público pera routes Assigned" to them. I believe that citizens considering this purpose should think through their factors before rie finally deciding. "The Transportation Authority had to take over passenger transportation in the metropolitan area during the war when the company then providing such service went bankrupt. As automobile production and shipments normalized after the war, a large number of public cars began to travel on the routes served by the Transportation Authority. As a result, the Authority has lost large sums of money which the Legislature has had to allocate to the 'Jeioro Insular Railway. Lately, this" money has amounted to almost half a million dollars a year. I41 a Pempectiva" "Losing this money every "fioa "IgMiflca have troiolentos teachers less and leave without school twelve thousand nlfins; or means to stop feeding eleven thousand nlfios in school canteens; or means serving it rie milk less for forty thousand niñea; or means rie ten to fifteen kilometers less road every Joa years, to the detriment of -the same public cars; or slgnl" flca the support of two hundred beds less in hospitals; or (Cont. at. page 14, Col. 41
f ~1F ft R A L J5L Wif ■ > B. .'-Imlw > míIi jbR 4 ] K** NHL Jr iMb 3 B vSwK bi J & I Hi I TiuBABB I i B L I la 1 I Ví' 'BJB ir A i 1 MB W W PML i. t r .. w Ufl Bk I Wl i l Hk. I ■Trl Hk I r rl IB 1 w 3 ■■ 1 ' ros B MB 1 lu/1 ■ B r Mi , wVm IK :F 4 b JKKKKí lUlihdH B B B B B IB iSB IbtB i ■■ P-v arfé.
"u honor. A au Isqulerda are the genera! Esteves, Lic. Quiñones. lic. Ramos Antonlnl, and Gen. Albert. 1.a central photo captures the moment when the Governor passed in front of the flag of the Executive, who "aluda in attention. He is accompanied by *1 General Esteves and in the background, Captain Alberto Guerrero. The last one
Edwin L. Sibert, Chief of teo Source of the Army in thea Antilles: the general commander of the National Guard, Luí* Raúl Esteve* : lo* president* of 1m legislative* chamber* Samuel R. Quiftone* and Erne*to Ramoe Antonlnl, and another". In the first photo a in isqulerda appears the Governor at the moment" when he was watching the parade in
MUÑOZ IN TORTUGUERO - The summer exercises held by the National Guard at Camp Tortuguero, Vega Baja, ended yesterday with the celebration of Governor's Day. The day's ceremonies were attended by Governor Lula Muflns Marin, who is Commander in Chief of the. National Guard and Gen.
photo shows the Governor presenting the Elsenhower trophy to Captain Alejo Rivera Morale", who commands Company K of the 9M, winner of the trophy. The heavy rain forced the Governor and his escort to wear the special cape used by the Army during the campaign period.
Pons Says There Is Plan To Expand Psychiatric Service On Island
Health Commissioner Favors Raising Salaries For Doctors Working In Government Agencies
By LUIS HERNANDEZ AQUINO EL MUNDO Staff Writer ; Health Commissioner, Dr. Juan A. Pons, referred yesterday to a vast plan of twelve thousand beds for the mentally ill, which will be initiated soon by the Department of Health, and which will cover the Island in general. Dr. Pons also said that the Island Government should look for a formula to improve the salaries of the doctors who serve the government, because the "present salaries do not give the Department of Health the authority to demand that its doctors give the service all the time it needs". On his return from the United States, Dr. Pons referred to several of the steps taken there, among which was that of the Psychiatric Hospital. With Mr. Julio Perez, director of the Hospital Census, he visited the Federal Public Health Bureau, where he discussed the expansion of that hospital, especially the observation and admission building. This building consists of one hundred beds and is intended for the observation of the sick, who are classified, and it will be decided to which part of the hospital they will go. In this unit will be retained those who in a short time can be subjected to treatment.
BBL B F B B MB ' MB DR. JUAN A, PONS i lo Intensive for healing. Pian da Hospitales Psiquiátrico* Dr. Pons said that the interview was attended by Federal Public Health authorities specializing in the matter of designs for mental illness hospitals, and that it was agreed (Cont. on page 14. Col. 1>
Board Approves Capital Hospital Plan National Entity Gives Recognition for Work in Surgery The Council on Medical Education and Hospitals of the American Medical Association and the Board of the American Medical Association. The Council on Medical Education and Hospitals of the American Medical Association and the United States Board of Surgery approved the training program for resident physicians in surgery at the San Juan Municipal Hospital. The San Juan Municipal Hospital is the first on the Island to receive this distinction. The first valuable acquisition obtained by this hospital was the approval, by the Council on Medical Education and Hospitals of the American Medical Association, of the internship training program in 1948. In May 1948, the Pediatric Service of the San Juan Municipal Hospital also obtained limited recognition from the American Board of Pediatrics to train residents for one year in this specialty, and in 1949, the San Juan Municipal Hospital obtained full approval from the American College of Surgeons. Referring to the recent recognition, yesterday the Administration of the Capital and Dr. Roberto J. Jimenez, Director of Beneficencia, expressed to the medical profession of the country and the public in general that "this is the achievement of a recognition that represents the pinnacle of what a hospital in our country can obtain". They also expressed the following: "The San Juan Municipal Hospital has made history by being the first hospital on the Island of Puerto Rico to receive official approval by the American Medical Association and the Board of Surgery for the training of residents there. "Especially during the last decade, several members of the medical profession have been trying to obtain sufficient recognition to gain admission to the various specialty Boards, this being the greatest recognition that a professional can yearn for. To the Board of General Surgery, only three members of our profession belong, but there are those who have already (Cont. on page 14, Col. 8)
Auditor Requires Regulation of Bowling Pikes Instructs Municipalities* (himplan with Supreme Court Opinion The* municipalities* of the Island must regulate the operation of bowling pikes - hippodromo* de caballitos, through* ordinances approved by their municipal assemblies. An order to this effect has been issued by the Island Auditor based on a recent opinion of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico. The Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, has addressed a circular to the Mayors, Secretaries, Secretaries-Audltores and Presidents .of the Assemblies Munlcipale* Imposing upon them the decision of the Supreme Court which states, in part: "Law 63 of 1938 prohibits the es♦ableclmlentó and exploitation of 1as 'picas' to racetracks to which it alludes, but makes an exception and allows the same to be established during the period of patron saint festivities and in accordance with the regulations provided by the municipal assemblies, Exception Established "Exceptions of this nature must be interpreted restrictively and have to be complied with to the fullest to be able to enjoy them. In order to enjoy the exception established by Law 63 of 19.38 it is not only necessary that the municipal assemblies of municipalities approve an ordinance fixing the days on which, according to tradition, the patronal feasts must be celebrated within the territorial limits of the municipality, but it is also necessary that said assemblies approve regulations to that effect". Inatrneelone* of the Auditor The Auditor's Instructions on the subject, contained in the circular referred to, read: "Because of the foregoing, the municipal assemblies should adopt an ordinance to govern during the days on which the patronal feasts are celebrated, re(Cont, at page 14, Col. 3)
A New Wage Bill I. Wages Bill Would Affect Island
Proposes Central Offices Make Extra Pay Would Declare National Policy Would Be Equal Wages Here and in U.S. By FAUiThARRIRON WASHINGTON, Aug. 5 - (PU) - An effort will be made in the House next week to pass a new hours bill and change it. The measure would raise the national minimum wage from 40 to 75 cents an hour and affect Puerto Rico in two respects: 1. The bill would declare that it is the policy of the National Wage and Hour Law to see that the minimum wage in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Island be raised to the 75-cent level. 2. The bill would provide for exempt time pay for center workers over 40 hours of work per week, except during the 14-week peak season. Under the current Wage and Hour Law, which is called the Fair Labor Standards Act, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands are exempt from the forty-cent minimum wage. There is also no minimum wage policy statement in those areas. The current law, b4*O3Í", does not require overtime pay for a 40-hour workweek at sugar mills in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and Hawaii, nor on the mainland. According to the sugar experts in this capital, the normal temporary milling season in Puerto Rico extends more or less from February 1 to June 1, with a few mills operating for a longer period. These authorities estimate that the average work week consists of six or seven eight-hour shifts". In accordance with the additional pay provision of the project, it would be necessary to increase the work force to establish five eight-hour shifts a week, or to pay overtime for the hours worked on the sixth or seventh day. This would mean that overtime pay would go into effect in 1*s sugar mills for at least a year, and in some cases six or eight weeks a year. Hawallano* Protest Txíb hawailano" sugar producers have protested this kind of provision because : their mills grind for eight : months* or more a year, with the workers working on the basis of six eight-hour* shifts* a "emana. I<a layout would probably createla no difference in 1 the" contlentne caftcrax areas, ' where the milling season is normally rie less than heat- ' ce weeks. i The layout, however, ton- 1 would have an effect on the industry rie the 1 beet. Faifa by vetse if this project 1 has rie chances rie approval. It is one of five bills which could be brought to the floor during debate, and there is no assurance that it, or any other like it, will receive the votes necessary for passage, ' ' ' Ix>cal Reaction It is understood that the bill will provoke immediate local reaction in Puerto Rico. As is known, the sugar industry, principally, has been claiming that the high production costs could have disastrous consequences for the general economy of the country. Lately, the industry has been opposed to a request from the unions for wage increases, provoking an impasse that has led to stoppages in all sectors of the industry.
i Florida Neighborhood Plan Agreed To In
I ''W- 3 ■" i i w ¡ ■ ' moIRjBVlBl BM. - JBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBMBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBz *.
From left to right are Representative Figueroa; Senator Carmelo Rodríguez García; Representative Frandafo Díaz Marchand, Chairman of the Commission; Representative Arcillo Alvarado; Representative María JJbertad (tóme", and Representative Slgfredo Véle"... (Photo EL MUNDO).
The Commission was created by the Capitol Hill, under the chairmanship of Representative Francisco Díaz Marchand. This commission was created by Law number 29 of 1949, which provides for the study of the conditions of the settlement and the possibilities of organizing a new municipality there.
By Jose M. UFRET Editor of EL MUNDO The Legislative Commission studying the feasibility of having the town of Florida, riel Municipality of Barczloneta, become an independent municipal entity, met yesterday morning in the caucus room Truman urges passage of the Gila Education Bill at a conference. Legislators Are Not Inclined To Indulge Him For Robert. RARKDOLL WASHINGTON, Aug. 5 (PLVPresident Truman pressed his cong.'slonal leaders today to act on a bill providing .$¡"0,000,000 for federal aid to education, but House Democratic leader John W. McCormack told him that passage in the course of this aealon was "very problematical." Mr. Truman called a large group of House and Senate lieutenants for a one-hour conference at the White House to discuss the legislation, which sparked a bitter religious dispute in Congress and led to the controversy between Cardinal Franela Spellman and Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt. Of all these, only two "-nators- Elbert D. Thoma, of Utah, and J. Howard McGrath, of Rhode Island- gave encouragement to the President. Loa mlembroa of 1a House, where the legislation is about rie to end in failure, either refused, to make comment on them or pronounced in frank pessimism. The religious dispute, which apparently put the death knell on the bill, revolved around the proposed use of rare federal funds for parochial schools and the deprivation of others. It was this issue that moved Carden"! Snellman to renounce Ja aeftora Roosevelt as "anti-Catholic" because he opposed it. McCormack said that the "trigger for discussion in the House was the so-called Thomas bill, already passed by the Senate. The measure sidesteps the sensitive religious question, allowing the "tied to decide individually "1 Joa funds should be used for 1ns private" school" as well as for the plbllcaa. The Rarden bill limits federal funds to public schools and specifically prohibits their use for the transportation and religious services that some states provide to parochial schools. (Cont. on page 14, Col. 8).
Present at yesterday's meeting were Commission Chairman Francisco Diaz Marchand, Representatives María Libertad Gómez, Leopoldo Figueroa, Sigfr'rio Vékz and Arcilio Alvarado, and Senator (Cont. on page 14, Col. 7).
! Puerto Rico Produces 1,277,491 Tons in Present Harvest Calculate Surplus Will Reach 115,000 Short Tons, Not Including Normal Inventory For ~LUI8 SANCHEZ CARPA Editor of EL MUNDO - Last Thursday the sugar harvest ended in Puerto Rico, with the liquidation of the milling by the Ce-ntral Plazuela, the last mill to conclude its work this year. - -
The completion of work at Central Plazuela brought the sugar produced in this harvest to 1,277,491 short tons. This production exceeded by 169,231 short tons the production of last year's harvest, when 1,108,260 short tons were produced. According to information supplied yesterday to ente daily, the yield per sweet produced in the processing of cane this year was exceptionally low, compared to the previous year's yield per ton. It was explained that multiple factors were responsible for the low yield. Among other factors, the strike of some milers, which paralyzed work in factories and fields, was mentioned. The pro-strike porlorio, with its consequences of Incertldumbre, had a notable influence on the decline. For a month prior to the strike movement, industry was operating irregularly for fear of the strike. The cutting and hauling of cane was affected by this uncertainty, as well as work in factories. The strike and the period prior to it, caused an extension of the milling period, reaching the harvest in some areas during the months of July and even August, thus suffering the inconveniences of the "rain" of that period. According to our informant, if these adverse conditions had not arisen, the industry would have had a total production of 1,300,000 short tons this year, and the yield would have been higher. On the other hand, it was indicated that the current production surplus amounts to 206,R56 tons of sugar. From this surplus, and at the discretion of the federal Secretary of Agriculture, the amount will be allocated for normal, death (Cont, on page 14, Col- 8).
Other Towns Affected 'I ■ V By Influenza New Cases Reported In Mayagüez And CaguaR. Sp Takes Precautions T,he influenza has been spreading lately to other towns on the island, among them Mayagüez and Csguas. Recently, numerous outbreaks of this disease were reported in San Germán and Río Piedras. In many cases, 1" Influenza is not reported to the Public Health Units, because the patients remain at home until they are cured without medical assistance. For this reason, there is no detailed and complete information on the cases that have been registered and are being registered in the populations of the island. Island. In the town of Cnraza! six new cases of Influenza were registered on July 28, according to the report of the Department of Health's Bureau of Epidemiology. Influenza in CagtiM Our correspondent in Caguaí, Mr. Anriré" Martínez Garda, reports the following on the Influenza in Caguas: "Many people in this population have been suffering from a flu attack, but in some cases it is believed to be a benign Influenza. j "As in Río Piedras, an outbreak of Influenza has appeared. Here we are somewhat fearful that the epidemic will invade us. "Dr. Manuel Rerrfos, of the Public Health Unit, is alert about the development of the outbreak (Cont. on page 12, Col. 3).