THE N@NDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy with occasional showers; partly cloudy tonight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 80 degrees; low, 74 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., M.M. inches of mercury.
NEW YOBK, hand 1L (FU). - Temperatures this late in the United States: Chicago, 40; Miami, 78; New York, 26; Washington, 87. Forecast for the next twenty-four hours in New York City: partly cloudy: highest temperature, eena of M. Forecast for tonight: partly cloudy; a little more Mo| lower temperature, about 25.
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
YEAR XXX
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -SATURDAY, MARCH 19, 1949
NUMBER 13610
FIVE CENTS
Atlantic Pact Binds the U. S. for 20 Years
* Western Europe Must Give Aid Acheson Says Must Declare War, Should Aggression Against Signatories For DONALD J| GONZALES WASHINGTON, March 18. - (PU) - The North Atlantic Pact would bind the United States. for the next twenty years to aid Western Europe in repelling any Russian aggression, but in aiding European nations, will use armed force only when Congress decides that such action is necessary. The pact, one of the greatest peacetime defensive alliances, was published today. It will be signed in this capital in early April. The general impression of the people in this capital is that the pact will be ratified quickly in the United States Senate. And in London, Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevln told a cheering House of Commons that the North Atlantic Pact has given the Western powers a tremendous advantage over the Soviet bloc, securing peace for generations to come. Ratification of the Pact by the Commons was taken for granted, because the Conservative opposition immediately pledged itself to back -1 Paeto, Frank Reaction" _ In Paris, a spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry, said that the Atlantic Pact was a "peace" alliance, directed only against aggression. The North Atlantic Pact does not commit the United States to automatic intervention in a war in the event of Soviet aggression. Under the U.S. Constitution, only Congress can declare war. The Protocol commits the United States to take whatever "action is necessary" in the event of aggression against one of the signatory nations. "including the use of the strong navy." But although the Treaty preserves all the formalities required by the constitutions of the signatory nations, the chief American representative in the negotiations that culminated in the drafting of the Treaty - Secretary of State Dean Acheson - said frankly that in a large-scale attack on western Europe, he would drag the United States into the war. In a Press interview, Aeheson said that the Pact does not morally obligate the United States to enter a war over a mere border incident. He made clear his belief, however, that under the Pact, Congress should declare war if an aggressor attacked any of the signatory nations, in the way Germany attacked France in World War I and World War II. . The Secretary said that strong measures should be taken in the event of any aggression that jeopardized the security and peace of the region of the signatory countries of the treaty. Answering a question, Acheson said that an attack directed at a U.S. plane while crossing the Soviet zone of occupation in Germany would be considered an armed attack under the Pact. Revolution Does Not Compel The Secretary of State went on to say that he does not consider revolutions and internal uprisings sufficient to invoke the Pact. But he added that the situation could take on a different meaning if internal revolutions and uprisings were being financed from outside. If one of the signatory nations believed that its political independence was threatened, it could ask the other powers to study the situation, but they would not be obliged to take action. - In Key West, President Tru. man declared that the Pact has his full support. The President read the text of the Pact, as well as a speech to be delivered tonight by Acheson on the Paeto. The major Senate leaders, both Democrats and Republicans, came out today in favor of the Compact. The Pact must be approved by two thirds of the Senate to become effective. Kenneth McKellar, chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, said he would insist that the United States be told how much it will cost the United States, which is the arsenal that will give practical value to the pact. A United Press dispatch from London states that the North Atlantic Pact, given publicity in Washington, unites about 4,800,000 soldiers of the Western nations in a single force, against about 4,900,000 Russian soldiers and their satellite countries. These forces vlrtually iguaCont, on P. 13, Col 4
Official Text Has 14 Articles Gives Distribution Of Armed Forces East And West WASHINGTON, March 18 (PU)-The following is the official text of the proposed North Atlantic Treaty: PREAMBLE The parties adhering to this Treaty reaffirm their faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and their desire to live at peace with all peoples and all governments. They are determined to safeguard the freedom, common heritage and civilization of their peoples, founded on the principles of democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law. Pursue the promotion of stability and welfare in the North Atlantic area. They are resolved to unite their efforts for the collective defense and preservation of peace and security. Therefore, to accept this Treaty of the North Atlantic. ARTICLE I The parties undertake, as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations, to settle any international disputes in which they may become involved, by peaceful means, in such a manner as to Cont, p. 14-Col, 7 $50,000,000 Needed for Schools Study Reveals Deplorable Conditions on the Island By BENJAMIN SANTANA EL MUNDO Editor About $50,000,000 would be needed to construct the buildings necessary to house the island's school population. That is the conclusion reached by a study recently conducted by the New York Times, through its education editor. Interested in the problem in all states and possessions, the New York Times conducted a general survey of the condition of school buildings. To arrive at the necessary conclusions, Benjamin Fine, the newspaper's education editor, contacted the state chiefs of instruction. The Department of Instruction in Puerto Rico received a form from Mr. Fine inquiring about school building needs. The study carried out reveals that, in most cases, these are in very poor condition. The shortage of buildings is so serious, according to the study, that no less than 850,000,000 would be necessary to build enough schools in which to teach the entire school population (Cont. on page 14, Col., 8).
Congress. United States due "orea
Atlantic Pact commits U.S. to aid Western European countries for 20 afina. Acheeon believes shall declare war in case of agalon. - The Bull bought tree ships from the AGWI in the Puerto Rico route. - e - Ground was broken on the new Insular Sanatorium building. - e - Oak Ridge became a city today. - e e The Supreme Court confirms the sentence against Aguzo Valdivieso for the El Verde case. - e e Only the Roig plant has yet to resume milling operations. - - - Study by New York Times reveals that the Island would need 8M,000,008 for its school plan. - - - - Vicáneis reveis the Island selling M ailmontieios items more expensive than on Miami. - - - Truman returns to the national capital today. - Graciela Rivera will sing at La Scala, Milan, Florence, Rome, London and Spain. - - - Former President of the Polytechnic Institute favors birth control. - o o Treasurer Descartes proposes to ship maflana to Spain.
Compendium of News
United States. Favors amendment to capital growth law for increase in value of property. - A bill improves the "pension" of members of the Insular Police. - Governor Mufles Marin has been invited to an event in Omaha, Nebraska. - There will be a Beata for the Inauguration of the Isla Grande terminal. - There is a possibility that the Senate will have to stop the clock at the end of the session. s s s Hospital do Tonco motivates the House. Bills filed so far in the House authorize appropriations for *16486,149. s s - Police accused of having committed bigamy. s s - Police accused of having committed bigamy. s s - House appropriated *180,000 for 14 athletic park" and Barbosa Park. Sanjurjo's defense accuses judge of bias.
Treasurer Leaves For U.S. Tomorrow.
Will Study Tax Collection System Favors Capital Increase Law Amendment. Legislation Prepared By Jusn Martin" Chapel Editor of El, MUNDO Legislation is being prepared in the Treasury Department to amend the income tax law with respect to "capital gain", or capital growth due to increase in the value of property. Treasurer Descartes is in favor of eliminating the "nonresident alien" phrases that apply to Puerto Ricans in the U.S. and Americans in Puerto Rico from the income tax laws, both federal and island. Most of the legislation sponsored by the Treasury Department was finalized yesterday to be submitted to the Legislative Assembly through the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico. Held Meeting The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, held conferences with the heads of divisions of his department to resolve all matters that have been under his consideration. Among those matters was the granting of new agencies of the oLterla, the number of which we did not know with certainty, but which is necessarily much lower than the number of applications filed by persons with merit to obtain them. Mr. Descartes plans to leave tomorrow for the United States. The purpose of his trip, according to what he said, is to study in the federal capital the systems for the collection of taxes, mainly on income and excise taxes. He also wants to meet with federal officials involved in tax matters or who are in any way related to Puerto Rico's affairs. He intends to send personnel from his department to receive special training in investigation techniques related to income tax and other aspects of administration. Possibly, on this trip, he will leave Wáshlngton to finalize arrangements for such training. Mr. Descartes has plans to have bank reports made in models and in the same form for all. He will make a study of the operation of banks in the United States, in connection with their mode of reporting to the Government and with Government procedures for inspecting them. It is proposed to obtain personnel experienced in the matter to examine the Puerto Rico Banking Law and the procedures for the inspection and supervision of banks used here, so that they may recommend such amendments as they deem necessary. Mr. Descartes, Seftor, is sympathetic to the proposal of the Resident Commissioner, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern, to eliminate in the income tax law of Puerto Rico the designation of "non-resident aliens" to those born in the United States and temporarily residing in the Island. Cont. at p. 14-Col. 5.
Truman Returns to the Capital Today
No Concept that Congressional Attitude Is a Rebellion Against His Legislative Plan
e ¿a9m*f** w ■■ -7 wj- * ' w'Sr 1 iLW ■ -il
President Harry S. Truman (a Ir isqulerda) and preslflcncIrI advisor John R. Steelmen leave the "small ('oes White" in Key West, Ftnrld", on a" fishing excursion aboard tina Navy boat. Truman caught an 18-pound barracuda." (Photo PA". * By JOHN U CUTTER CAYO HUESO, Florida, March 8. (PU)-President Truman said today that despite opposition from Southern Democrats and others, he still expects approval of most of his "fair deal" program by the United States.
"loyal deal," by Congress. -* He said the "latest" events in Congress show that the nation has a three-party system, just as it did during the presidential campaign last fall. He identified the three parties as Democrats, Republicans and Southerners. The way he said it seems to indicate that the President does not consider Southerners to be Democrats. But answering other questions during a press conference, Mr. Truman said he still hopes that some of his opponents now see the light, and he said that of course he does not consider the Southerners to be good Democrats. The President was friendly, rather than scathing, toward Congress, which has dealt heavy blows to his program of late. He reminded reporters that the first part of the current session was devoted to organizational work. "Déniea time," he said. "Many of the members of Congress," he said, "fundamentally are doing well." He said that "we must give them the opportunity, before" to judge what they do," The President was told that at the JeffersonJackson Day luncheon, he said, to prepare his campaign train and tour the Nation on behalf of his legislative program. The President said nothing more has been done in that regard. He said that the details of that trip have not been worked out, and that there is nothing more to what he said in the above speech. Contact with Washington Seftor Truman announced nothing in particular to the Press, about his vacation. He said that he has kept in touch with developments in Washington and that he is familiar with the development of the proposed North Atlantic defense pact, that he has read the text of the pact and a speech by Secretary of State Dean Aeheson, to be delivered tonight, and that both have his absolute approval. (Continued on page 14, Col. 7)
Vicéns Reports 25 Most Expensive Items Here Other Lines Are More . According to the comparative table sent to the Chamber of Regent's ReSident" by the Energy Supply AdmlnUtrator" as part of the information requested from him by the Secretary María Libertad Gómez regarding the situation of the prices of basic necessities, out of 32 items compared, 25 are sold in Puerto Rico more expensively than in Miami. . - The articles that are sold at a higher price in Miami than in Puerto Rico are: cod, at $0.1r> pound; lard, at $0.31 pound; chickpeas, at $0.25 pound; ground beef, at $0.37 pound; coffee, at $0.87, The articles sold in Miami at $0.1r> pound are: cod, at $0.45 pound; lard, at $0.31 pound; chickpeas, at $0.25 pound; ground beef, at $0.37 pound; coffee, at $0.87, The articles sold in Miami at lower prices than on the Island, are the following: evaporated milk, Carnation 4 oz. 6 cents; evaporated milk Carnation, Pet and others, 12 and a half cents, in 14-112 oz. cans; wheat flour, 10 cents, 10 cents, in 14-112 oz. cans.wheat flour, 10 cents" lb.; oleomargarine, 29 cents: salmon, canned, 85 cents"; ham, 59 cents" lb.; beans" with pork, 9 cents"; canned corn, 16-1|2 cents: petipois, 18-1 ¡2 cents; canned beans, 18 cents; fruit salad, 49 cents; piftas, 29 cents; pears 39 cents; peaches 27 and a half cents"; plums, 24 cents; tomato sauce, 13 cents; tomato sauce Ketchup, 19 cents; tomato juice, 12-Ü2 c.; tomato sauce Ketchup 19 cents; tomato juice, penny"; apricot juice, 13 cents; Octagon soap, 7 cents; potatoes, 5-l|2 cents: eggs, 6 cents: dough meat. 67 cents: chulé- , pork chops, 51 cents; liver, 1 (Continued on p. 14 col. 4).
Graciela will sing at La Scala, Florence, Rome and England.
(FU) - Graciela Rivera, Puerto Rican coloratura soprano, said today that she was "extremely satisfied" with the way she is being received by Italian music critics and opera lovers. In an interview at the Hotel Marino in Milan, the singer said she had commitments to sing in Florence, Ferrara and Rome. After that, she said, she may sing at Milan's La Scalptera, where the best Italian artists, and only a few privileged foreigners, perform. "I am very grateful for the way the Italian public has welcomed my art, during my three times in Naples," said eftorita Rivera. La seflorita Rivera, who has been in Italy since December, said she was not sure when she would return home, for-
.f " GRACIELA RIVERA had to fulfill several contracts during the gfio. She said she will be leaving Milan in a few days to prepare for her return home.
Isla Grande Terminal Inauguration Party To Be Held April 7th
By Jamos F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, April 18 (PU)At midnight on April 7, according to the announcement made today by S. Caro, the sky over San Juan will be illuminated with twenty searchlights, and the air terminal building on Isla Grande will be officially inaugurated. Caro, general administrator of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, said that several of the mainland's top aviation officials-perhaps including Civil Aeronautics Administrator W. Rentzel-will be present at the opening ceremonies. The vast steel construction at the Isla Grande airport has been described as one of the most
has been described as one of the most modern terminals in the Hemisphere. Construction began last August and will be virtually complete by April 7, according to Caro. Of course, some tiles will have to be added later," he explained, "to cover the concrete of the lobby, which is built like that of the theaters. The air-conditioned restaurant is equipped to serve the best meals in the Caribbean, said Caro. Jorge Bird, who leased the restaurant from the Transportation Authority, has invested about 8 Cont. on p. 14-Col. 8
Bill Improves Police Retirement Pay
Senate Recognizes Piñero's Work Upper House Authorized SI,128,000 to PEG,Will Print Géigel's Work By S. GÁlVtoFmÁtURANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer In the Senate session held yesterday morning, a bill was filed to increase pensions to the Insular Police. * According to S. 307 filed by Senator Barreto Perez, it increases the pensions and at the same time sets a scale based on categories and salaries. The bill determines that such pensions will be 50 percent of the salary for policemen; 45 percent of the salary for corporals and sergeants and 40 percent of the salary for officers. The bill also determines that upon the death of a policeman who is on pension, the widow and children may continue to receive the pension for a term of ten years. PEG Allowance Four bills were approved in third reading in yesterday's session. S. P. 152 was approved to appropriate to the Emergency Island Council the sum of $1,128.00 during fiscal year 1949-50. This sum is apportioned as follows: $380,000 for administrative expenses of the Emergency War Program; $600,000 for operating expenses of the Milk Station program; and $148,000 for operating expenses of the children's home program. It received the approval of the Senate, also on third reading, P. 180 to allocate $15,000 for the printing expenses of the Compilación de Leyes del Trebejo, entitled "Legislación Social de Puerto Rico", by Vicente Géigel Polanco. P. de 1a C. 345 was approved to allocate to the Island Fire Service the sum of $5,000 to expand and improve its training center. Tribute * Pifiero At yesterday's session a Concurrent Resolution was passed in recognition of the services, virtues and civic spirit of Don Jesus T. Piftero. Among a series of resolutions highlighting the work performed by Mr. Piftero during his public life, the work performed "as Governor of Puerto Rico, during which he carried out difficult and exemplary work of tact, integrity and intelligence in harmony with the purest principles that led him to the first magistracy of the Island, attending to the deep and legitimate wishes of our people", New Bills Six new bills were filed yesterday in the Senate, having been considered on first reading. These bills were as follows: S. 306. to settle a litigation or action of Vicente Rodriguez Ortíz, against the Government of Puerto Rico; S. 307 to amend sections 2 and 5 of Act 70 of May 3, 1931; S. 30R to allocate funds for the Commissioner of the Interior to proceed with the construction of a Pumps Park in Maunabo; S. 309 to establish the withdrawal of the Puerto Rican government's taxpayers' taxpayer's taxpayers' money; S. 309 to establish the withdrawal of the taxpayers' taxpayers' money to pay the taxpayers' taxpayer's taxpayers' money. 309 to establish the retirement of the members of the Puerto Rico Industrial Commission; P. S. 310, Rslgnating $30,000 so that together with an additional amount of fifteen thousand dollars to be contributed by the municipality of Manatí, a municipal jail may be built, and P. S. 311 to nar 1* sum of $25,000 for the construction of a fence around the high school and middle school of Manatí. Commission Appointed In response to an invitation from the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, a Commission was appointed composed of Senators Ernesto Cararsquillo, Luis Alfredo Colón, Lionel Fernández Méndez. Heraclío Rivera Colón, Carmelo Rodriguez García, Bolívar Pagán and Celestino Iriarte to visit the exhibition of the Vacational Schools,
La Bull Acquires AGWI Boats En Route to the Island
Miguel Ruch, vice president and representative in I* Hln of I* Bull Insular JJne, corporation that acquired three ships and propledndea of AGWI in Puerto Rico, 1 with the purpose of expanding "u" Boil them on the route between the Island and the Continent. Bill On Government Changes To Be Filed After Next Week. De Jesús Sees Hoover Experts Budget Bureau Director Jtoberto de Jesús, who spent five days in the United States on official business, has returned to San Juan (De Jesús said that in addition to conferring with members of the Hoover Committee on Government Reorganization, he attended the conference of the Society for Public Administration, which was held at the Statler Hotel in Washington on Saturday. Mr. De Jesus had the opportunity to learn in depth about the bill which, if approved, would give the President the power to reorganize the executive branch of the Government from time to time. The plan being tried in Puerto Rico is similar to that recommended by the Hoover Committee. The Governor would have general power to reorganize the insular executive branch. Any reorganization step would be submitted to the Legislature, which, within a reasonable time, could disapprove it by concurrent resolution. Such resolutions are effective without requiring the Governor's signature. Mr. De Jesús stated that he had interviewed in the United States with the most experienced persons in government reorganization matters. Among these" people are: Louis Brownlow, who was chairman of the Committee on Government Administration, appointed by President Roosevelt in 1937, and who recommended the plan which was the basis for the Government Administration Program, accepted in 1939; Luther Gulick, who was a member of that same committee, and is presently the head of the Institute of Public Administration in New York. James Rowe, who is a member of the Hoover Committee and an expert in government technique. He was administrative assistant to President Roosevelt, and undersecretary of the Treasury. Arnold Miles, who is head of the Government Organization branch of the Bureau of the Budget, and is in close contact with the Hoover Commission; and Frank Pace, head of the Bureau of the Pre. assumption. Mr. De Jesus studied the rationale and techniques used by the Hoover Committee. They recognized there that the prior proobtaining the power of the Legislature to then formulate Cont. at pg. 14-Col. 3
Purchase Also Other Properties All 3 Ships Sold Will Continue in Service. Price is $4,300,000 NEW YORK March 8. - (FU). - Atlantic Gulf and West Indies Steamship Lines announced today the sale of the three vessels it has now serving Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic and of its properties located in Puerto Rico and Ciudad Trujillo to the A. H. Bull Steamship Company and the A. H. Bull Steamship Company. H. Bull Steamship Company and its subsidiaries. The "b "rco" affected in the transaction are the Borlnquen, the Agwlcomet and the Cinch Knot. AGWI is to receive $4,300,000 for its properties, which transaction is subject to the disposition of certain securities. While AGWI and Bull Linea said that none of the 1* AGWI harems will be taken out of service as a result of the announced deal, a Bull executive stated that Bull was buying AGWI and RUI properties in order to increase and improve the If. nee's service in the Cochrane area. The Bul! currently operates 20 ships between the mainland, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, and the purchase will increase its fleet to 23 ships. Spokesmen for the two lines said that the actual transfer of ownership will take place as soon as certain minor "details" are settled. They said it will be very soon. AGWI decided to discontinue its service with Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic to concentrate "its attention on the service" with Mexico and Cuba currently provided by the New York and Cuba Mall Steamship Company. "The decision was made after a review of the company's operations in the U.S., according to an executive of the line. The decision was made after a study by the managing directors of the line's Puerto Rican and Dominican services. An AGWI spokesman said that a program is being studied with a view to the possible construction of one or more passenger and cargo vessels for service between Cuba and Mexico, provided that agreements can be reached with the North American Maritime Commission for the construction and subsidy of the operations and differential. . < The Bull Insular Line has plans for a major upgrade of the steamer Borlnquen at a cost of approximately $1 million. The reforms will be made in a term of only sixty days"), ' Hospital Ponce Motivates a Debate Santaella Alleges Preference Given to Guayama By JOBE M. GARCIA CALDERON Editor of EL MT.TNDO The information published last Friday" by EL MUNDO, regarding the situation of the project for the construction of the Ponce District Hospital yesterday motivated a heated and prolonged debate in the House of Representatives, in which numerous representatives participated. Shortly after the session began at 3:00 p.m., Ponre Representative Leoncio Santaella León, citing information from EL MUNDO, declared that he was surprised by the news that the Guayama District Hospital was going to be built before the Ponre Hospital. "Since 1941," he said, "there has been discussion about this hospital, but to date it has not been built. After the plans were made, which cost $300,000, they had to be abandoned and the hospital was never built." The promise," Santaella added, "and the agreement was that the Ponce District Hospital would be the first to be built and now we find that the Antltu* berculous Hospital and the Hospital for the Mentally Ill are being built, and the Guayama District Hospital is about to be started and there are not even the plans" or the land" for the Ponce hospital. . "I make a motion," Santaella said, "that the Department of Health's Secretary Bauer be called again to clarify this issue once and for all. Benjamín Ortix, floor leader of the PDP majority, addressed the House, corroborating the information published by EL MUNDO, and informed that a bill assigning $1,720,000 for the construction of the Ponee hospital was to be discussed on the agenda. Mr. Ortíi also explained the reasons for the bill's approval, and stated that it was to be discussed on the agenda.