THE NANDO
WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, HOT: Partly cloudy, becoming locally cloudy during a few scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, AVER: High, M degrees: low, 72 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.79 inches of mercury,
NEW YORK, Nov. A (FU).- The following temperatures were reported this afternoon: New York, 58; Chicago, 48; Wáahlngton, 47; Miami, 77. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities": fine and cool weather, with the highest temperature near M. Winds freeeo" from the Northeast.
TOMORROW'S NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. B,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY NOVEMBER 5, 1949
NUMBER 13836
FIVE CENTS
U.S. Pledges Continued U.N. Aid For Island's Future Development
Reds Hold Demonstration In New York Police Reinforce Harlem Area, Receive Lidferee Communiatas' By johSTmTroach NEW YORK, Nov. 4. (P. U.)-Police Commissioner William P. O'Brien sent three hundred police officers to New York City for a demonstration. O'Brien, sent three hundred and sixty additional police to Harlem today to prevent another outbreak of violence like that which followed a "victory demonstration" at a pro-communist "demonstration" celebrating the release from jail of the eleven Communist "leaders," who were released on bail. ' t Sel" police* were wounded" in the" disorder and six men were jailed. O'Brien ordered 135 additional policemen, mounted policemen and detectives to be sent for the eight o'clock beat from eight o'clock in the morning to four o'clock in the afternoon, and 225 additional policemen for the four o'clock beat from four o'clock in the afternoon to midnight. He did not disclose how long the order will be in effect. The outbreak last night followed a parade in honor of Benjamin Davi, Jr., one of eleven members of the American Communist Party polktburo convicted of conspiracy. The eleven leaders were released from jail yesterday upon posting a total bail of $260,000. Bricks, flowers and bottles rained down on the police from the upper floors of apartment buildings along Lenox Avenue as the officers tried to control the demonstrators, who were being urged by loudspeakers to "not be stopped by these blue-blue-collar fascists. Crowd Dispersed Additional police clone*" finally quelled the riot and the crowd dispersed by separate routes, for another demonstration. Police said they broke up the march because the demonstrators did not have permits and were blocking traffic. Five of those arrested were charged with disorderly conduct. The sixth was charged with assault for throwing a flaming torch at a policeman. None of the officers were seriously injured.
■ Legal Battle Augured Around Fort San Jeronimo ■ I ■ £ ■. " ''ll'íí" zftKí''''. j, 1 ■ . - The historic Geronimo flan fort, a centuries-old sentinel that stands next to the Dos Bridge, has become the target of a legal battle between several agencies disputing its ownership. The Government of Puerto Rico is interested in rescuing the old fort, to turn it into a tourist attraction (Photo Government of Puerto Rico), - - ■ ■ ■■■■ -- a
Responds to Red Delegate Denies Economy Under Control. Mention Made of Vaccine Against Tisisis LAKE New York, Nov. 4 - (FU) - The United States delegation to the United Nations General Assembly today defended U.S. policy in Puerto Rico and pledged to continue "to assist in the future development of the island. Charles Fahy, speaking at the Co. I mlté of Trustees of the General Assembly, made the statement in denying the charge made on' Thursday by the Ukrainian delegate. In his speech yesterday, the ucra■llagan speaks deto Rico territory of a -n a single authorized projec pain single pala, Es. Ukrainian said mportaciones de men de States from 20 to 40 per ue los dej mer- - cado mundial alendo los producto", de calidad inferior. Galagan stated that Puerto R!. eo has no political rights" and that the" local laws"" are subject to Ja deroisación of the Governor. "Even the Commissioner of Education is appointed by the President of the United States," with Senate confirmation," he said. - He stated that "all this is "put to the Charter of the" United Nations" which sets out the principle da that the" interests of the" inhabitants "on the main." Contrast with Ukraine Making dn centraste eon the autonomy granted to Puerto Rico. Fahy, said that "in truth Vora. gla e" a pata that has no gnbterw? préste and whose current regime ( lacks the elementary knowledge of freedom or independen, cía." Fahy said textually" "The people of Puerto Rico reaentlrá the slander raised yesterday by the Ukrainian delegate regarding their achievement" achieved." They" are justifiably proud of their successes. "My delegation does not wish to burden this Committee with a lengthy account of the achievements in Puerto Rico. However, some startling facts should be noted. On January 2, 1949, "l prltner Governor elected by 'the Puerto Ricans,' Mr. Luis Mu. floz Marin, who was born and 'duced ' in Puerto Rico, was sworn into office. We believe that Puerto . Rico the only territory without goblery< not its own in the world, which freely eMgé "u own head of! execlvo. Puerto Rico has also a two-house legislature, elected by the people; and the Gober, nador appoints his executive council with the consent of the higher House of "u legislature. "Puerto Rico spends at present about 20 percent of its budget on education, or a total of approximately 523,000,000. Education is free and compulsory on the Island. "As to the statement of the Ukrainian representative that educational programs on the Island may be vetoed in the United States, the facts reveal that the Commissioner of Education is a Puerto Rican, appointed by the Governor of Puerto Rico, and confirmed by the Puerto Rican Senate (Continued on Page 14 Col. 5).
Deficient Water Service To Schools Instruction Gives Paflón To Conjure Problem Investigation The supply of potable water is becoming a serious problem for Puerto Rico's public schools, according to an investigation conducted by officials of the Department of Transportation. A complaint from a parent regarding water supply conditions at BaL dorioty School in San Juan prompted Commissioner Vlllaronga to order an investigation. The complainant alleged that in the referred school there is not an adequate supply of drinking water, since the "source" has been broken for some time, and that the students are forced to drink water in the "sink" and "pen" of the "unitary" restroom, with serious risk to "their" health. The investigation was conducted by the aubcomlalonado Julio Sellé* Solé, the superintendent of schools Vernor E. Taylor and the assistant superintendent R. Carrasquillo. Report da Sellé" The following are the main conclusions of the Report submitted by the aubcomlalonado Sellé" Solá *1 commissioner Vlllaronga, in relation to the sources of agua: "For some time, many d" appear in the local newspapers comment any in connection with the matter, Mr. R. Carrasquillo, assistant superintendent, speaks been studying the problem created by the" source" of water in our" schools. "Mr. Carrasquillo reports that the situation has improved in some schools. In another," there are already plans to improve the existing one or to supply a new source. "In the E "cuela Asenjo the" te" were clogged". Ya yestán funcionando "En la E "cuela Psgn Rufo hay unaa fuentea myy*<leja", pero en buenas condlrimtss de funciona(Continued on P. 14 Col. 7) "> <m> <"*■■"i
Jimenez Alleges Attempted Expropriation Of Usufruct Of Fort Persoiiafl Experts Believe Congressional Action Would Be Needed. Castle Has Interesting History By S. GALVeTmATURÁNA EL MUNDO Staff Writer The expropriation of the historic Castillo de San Gerónimo by the Government of Puerto Rico may turn into an interesting legal battle, as reported yesterday to the Secretary of the Interior, "eftor Jorge Ji-
r<l Because the Castle is Federal property, - even though it is leased in usufruct to Colonel Vlrgil Baker for a period of 999 years, - persons knowledgeable in the matter sustain the criterion that the Government of Puerto Rico cannot expropriate a federal property. The only way to obtain the expropriation is through Congressional action, transferring it to the Insular Government. It is argued that Colonel Baker has only leased the property, but that it belongs to the Government of the United States," and therefore, the recourse of compulsory expropriation does not fit. Jiménez Differs The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge Jiménez, differed from the previous opinion. The Commissioner said that what he "intends to expropriate is the usufruct of the leased property, accompanied, of course, by the residence built on the Castle by Colonel Baker, and which is not property of the United States Government. The case has been referred by Commissioner Jimenez to the Department of Justice, which has been studying all pertinent documentation related to the proposed expropriation. Historical Data Very little historical data is available on the ancient fortress, but at least one heroic deed that took place within its walls can be related. History reports that when the English attacked the island in the year 4797, the commander Liaron, captain of the ship "Le Triomphant", one of the ships of the French squadron that were in the bay at the time of the English attack - was sent to San Geronimo with his ship, the "Le Triomphant".
Island To Demonstrate Industries Factories To Open Door To Inspection Of Production Methods ¡ According to a communiqué authorized by the 'Fortaleza, Puerto Rico, in the coming month and for a period of three "weeks will show how technical aid can be given to backward areas," making a demonstration of its growing industrial power. (More" of the new industries will open their doors to inspect the modern methods of production being carried out in this Caribbean island, where agriculture has ceased to be the mainstay of its economy, according to the press release. Governor Muñoz Marín, announced yesterday having appointed an official committee to prepare the details of the celebration of the industrial exhibition, which "e Informa, will attract to San Juan high dignitaries of banking, 1a Industry, insurance and other activities of the continental United States. । Members of Congress have also been encouraged to see personally that the projects necessary for a permanent and far-reaching industrialization are already a reality. Wealth Will Increase As a result of all this, the GohleAo estimates that the wealth of the Island will increase by about $50,000,000 with (Continued on page 14, Col. 8)
The mutiny threat arose after the release from prison of the eleven members of the Communist Party Polltburo. They have been in jail for three weeks since their conviction on August 14 for conspiring to overthrow the U.S. government, and have been serving a three-week prison term since their conviction on August 14.
OUR SATURDAY SUPPLEMENT On the occasion of our one hundredth circulation and in response to insistent public demand, as of today our Saturday supplement will add a few thousand copies entirely in black, as opposed to the bulk of 1" edition, which is printed in black and color. We have already given the corresponding orders to adequately increase the printing of the supplement in color. In the meantime, we respond to our public in the manner already indicated.
9VJHB * tus MV mrBeH b wW bb> g? - tu ■■ / HL '9 . a )1 Ss fli BIr m 1 . * Vi Kk L . . Bf ■ rí * 5 ,B.li®BBEbiT0 K v V a ****"mmsl ¿4 3BB VBi f 3 'B K ImMfm IB B WEB H T T f IT i MML w F . RI wB Bgl l ' otar T ■ at x " V- T W ' felfee ' Wrtó I * 3 - fl 1 B-,, -' - Mr ; ' '
the center of the group, facing the camera, are Dr. Juan A. Pons, Commissioner of Health, and Mrs. Inés Marta Mendosa de Mth ños Marín, wife of the Governor, (Photo by EL MUNDO).
At 8:00 a.m. yesterday morning the plane carrying the mortal remains of Miss Beatris Costa and Miss Olga Martines, who perished in the recent plane crash at Washington National Airport, arrived at the airport in Lela Grande. In the first
photograph we see the moment when the coffin of Miss Costa was being carried by friends and relatives of the deceased. In the center, the moment when the coffin containing the body of Miss Martines was placed in a hearse. In the third row, the group of deu-
- The group of deceased "Miss" Martines' relatives, friends and co-workers, who came to the airport for the Christian mission of claiming the deceased's remains. Among those present were numerous employees of the Health Department, where both served for several years. At
Government Makes Food Management
Surplus Use Requires Law Funds Must Be Allocated To Cover Transfer From U.S. To Puerto Rico By WILLIAM rfoRVILLTKR Washington, Nov. 4 - (Special to THE WORLD). - El* MUNDO learned today that negotiations are underway between the Department of Agriculture and the Government of Puerto Rico. Under the new Farm Bill passed by the last Congress, the Federal Government may dispose in various ways of the large stocks of agricultural commodities purchased under the price maintenance program. Before the Island Government can obtain the commodities, however, it is required that the Island Legislature pass legislation to pay for the transportation of the commodities from where they are stored by the Credit and Supply Corporation. It is understood that "ador Muñoz Marín is prepared "to request authorization from the Legislature to obtain large quantities of surplus/excess oil. The Government of Puerto Rico may make perishable goods available to Puerto Rico when the Credit and Supply Corporation determines that the desired items will not be in demand in the domestic market before they are damaged. In other words, if the CCS determines that the normal markets here cannot absorb the goods before they are damaged, they may be shipped to Puerto Rico, with the Island Government paying the transportation costs. Sufficient Time This determination must be made in sufficient time to allow for full distribution and final consumption of the products, 'while they are in a perfect state of preservation. Among the surplus products likely to be made available to Puerto Rico are soco eggs, butter, powdered lecho, Cheddar cheese, prunes and raisins. It is likely that in the future the beans will be approved for export. Should this be done, a Department of Agriculture official told EL MUNDO, it would be allocated more to Puerto Rico than to any other area, because they form a traditional part of the diet. This official said that the School Lunchroom Program would receive more beans per child than any other product. The new Farm Bill allowed the distribution of most of the surplus products to the School Meals Program, which has been successful with the powdered loche has been "encouraging" - said the spokesman. Other department officials praised the University of Puerto Rico's Nutrition Committee, which offered demonstrations throughout the island on the preparation and use of powdered milk. The program will continue for another six months, it was said. Since powdered milk was introduced into the School Lunchroom Program three years ago, its popularity has increased greatly. The Federal Government has sent to the Island, completely free of charge, 1,970,000 pounds of powdered milk for the program from July 1, 1948 to June 30 of this year. This is equivalent to 7,880,000 liters of milk for Puerto Rico's schoolchildren in one year. Department officials said they welcomed with enthusiasm the estimate of Education Commissioner Mariano Vlllaronga that the education program requires the inclusion of another 140,000 children in the school lunch program in the future.
The Remains of Olga Martinez and Beatriz Costa are Brought to San Juan
Mayor of San Juan Visits New York
r I■■ 11 I ■ ■ ■W " 1 W c M . SIX ' y B £*c*'''z - : - B 'iKr " ~ **
Ran Juan Mayor Felisa Rincon de Gautier is greeted by Mayor William O'Dwyer during her visit to the New York City City Hall on Thursday. She was pleased that her compatriots living in the big city voted for Mayor O'Dwyer's reelection (Associated Press Photo).
Customs Exemption on Foreign Travel Increased
U.S. Citizens Can Bring in $200 for Short Trips, $500 for 12 Days or More
U.S. citizens returning from foreign countries under circumstances conforming to the requirements as to length of trip and intervals between trips may now bring in merchandise for personal use free of duty up to a value of
8200 in cases of short trips, and 5500 in cases of stay outside the Nation for more than twelve days. The Federal Customs Service issued a press release yesterday, ■ informing of the substantial increase in the maximum amounts of merchandise that travelers visiting abroad may bring with them without paying customs duties. Mr. Frank Dow, Commissioner of U.S. Customs, announced that Customs officials at all ports of entry have begun to implement the provisions of legislation recently passed by President Truman which increases the basic exemption from $8100 to $200. ¡ As is known, previously i persons visiting abroad < were entitled to bring with them mer- < cinnamon Ubre de derecho" of Adua- ' ñas, in the sum of $100 in cases 1 of trips of short duration, and of 1 $200 in cases of trips of longer i duration. The Requirements , The note to that effect, states that "to be Qualified to enjoy ; the exemption of contributions from ; Customs, the merchandise introduced ( must have been acquired in the ex. tranjero, as An Incident of the via- ] je, intended for personal or । home use, and duly declared ( at the port of entry in the United States ।. Items acquired pn- । ra use of other persons or for commercial purposes, are not exempt. The $200 basic exemption usually applies when the traveler has been abroad for at least 48 hours. In no case shall the $200 exemption be allowed for more than one occasion during a 31-day period. The note below states that "Mr. Dow pointed out that other" provisions of the tariff law provide for an additional personal exemption on merchandise amounting to $300 when the traveler has been out of the country for at least 12 days. Llcore" and cigars cannot be in the $300 exemption, (Continued on p. 14, col. 7) I
>■■■■- ' Arrived Yesterday The Corpses Of 2 Victims Performed Yesterday Same Burials Beatris Costa And Olga Martines By Enrique Ramirea Eran ' Redactor da EL MUNDO \6nticípándo "a qulnct mlmdís a of arrival, landed yesterday at" 8 1*. M., in lila Grandetzfrente to the hangar of the Eaatern Air Linez, the plane of do" engines DC3-79028, of the Riddlt Co" that brought from the United States the corpses of the ladies Olga Martinez and Beatriz Costa, who perished tragically, together with 53 people more, in the biggest disaster of the history of the civil aviation, happened in Wáahlngton. * The plane took off from Miami at 2:35 A.M. and arrived in Isla Grande at 2:35 A.M. and arrived at Isla Grande, at 8 A, M" pallado by the aviator Hetterllng, Long before the landing of the DC-3, i, they were in the airport, next to *1 hangar of the Eastern Air Lines, Mrs. Iné" Mendoza de Muñoz Marín; the Commissioner of Health, doctor Juan Antonio Pons; Víctor Pon" and his wife Carolina Núñez; relatives of Olga Martínez; Engineer Arturo Costa, brother of Miss Beatriz Costa, and other" relatives; Sanitation Engineer Osvaldo Rivera; Health Inspector José Garcia Rivera; Dr. José R. Alum, deputy commissioner of Health, and Dr. José Garcia Rivera. Alum, Deputy Commissioner of Health; the representative of Eastern Air Line, Ramon Lavandero; Ferdinand Sanchez & Jeva, wife of Mrs. Edna Martinez, sister of the disappeared Olga; the nurses Paula Margero and Candida Carrillo, supervisors of midwives; Ernesto Antommattel and Juan Coita Alvarez, uncles of Beatriz Costa; Rafael Correa, uncle polyI (Continued on page 14, col. 2).