THE WNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Considerable cloudiness with showers today, becoming cloudy with scattered showers tonight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, SS; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:M this afternoon, 80.94 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, July 18. (PU) - This afternoon today ae recorded lea slgulentec temperatuna: Chicago, $7; Miami, K 18; New York, 78; Wáshlngton, 86. Predleelones pan maflana in New York and neighboring dudadee: Partly cloudy; temperature higher; low M; winds light and variable during the afternoon.
MORNING DAILY ..i. - < ♦ <1 ' 1 * - '
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 16, 1949.
NUMBER 13725
FIVE CENTS
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter* Post Office. San Juan, P. ■>
Dominican Ambassadors entertained in San Juan Lí ú 9 | f'' YB ¿Uk w W Jfl " I M 1 i " i". - i®] B ' ¥■ i JW® J® J® ~'> I í Mf" '■ V* í I - fifi ■UHJJW. "s S ¡b . ■f' ---> II X¿ jLÜBF -Bl ¡ l| | K ' MsB isa f I II I I I I lil Sjg& I Ir BR KÍ 1'4 "ffiWm ' ™ J / 11 - n **'2 Mr B B ¡MBB 4 ■!■■'; s><' 4É!Be?L - "aziaaiK'..'..... First to greet her Dominican colleague upon arrival th data yesterday in Puerto Rico, San Juan's most beautiful clerk, Miss Leonor Josefina Navas. shakes hands with Miss Ilaa Georgina Arisa (left, photo right), elected most beautiful secretary of Ciudad Trujillo. Observing the meeting is Mr. Robert L. Schmitt, who was absent from the Metro in Puerto Rico. In the photo at left, aefiorita Arisa poses with her traveling companions, ladies Marta SAncnes Vidal, Brigida Coll and Luisa Amelia Bonelli, who placed second, third and fourth in the contest held in Ciudad Trujillo. (Photos EL MUNDO)
Georgina
-" - - - - - "Pan American Offers Landing Version
El Mundo Adds Official Report To ' TA Effect, -- -- The San Juan Station Manager of Pan American Airways, Mr. William R. McElhannon, writes a letter to EL MUNDO" asking him to rectify his recent report on the conditions under which one of his Constellation aircraft landed. EL MUNDO indulges Mr. McElhannon by publishing McElhannon by publishing Integra's letter and submits the case to the public, on its merits, by adding to it the official report of the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority on the landing which prompted the letter from the Pan American official. Following are both documents: i McElhannon's Letter < ° । "With reference to the article "suri" 1 to pop S. Gálvez Maturana on the front page of yesterday's EL MUNDO (July 13, 1949), we wish to call your attention to the erroneous information contained therein. The article represents inaccurate information about the true events that occurred during the flight piloted by Captain H. H. Bunker on July 6, 1949. We believe that your untrue version of the blind man's story reflects not only on Pan American Airways but also on the entire aviation industry. In the following analysis of the news article, paragraph by paragraph as you have published it, we will state the true facts involved in what happened: The PAA Constellation type aircraft, piloted by Captain H. H. Dunker made a normal landing on the morning of July 6, 1949, with one engine off, one propeller spinning and propelled by air, and two engines operating normally. Captain Dunker at no time indicated that a forced landing was necessary because the landing gear was in perfect condition other than the fact that power could have been supplied to the air-driven spinning propeller only if it had been deemed necessary in order to make a safe landing. In the interest of safety, when Captain Dunker announced that an engine was inoperative and a propeller was wind-driven only, the accident team was put on alert in accordance with the usual procedures. Also in accordance with established practices, Captain Dunker circled twice over the landing field in order to descend from an altitude of 7,500 feet and make a normal landing. It was not necessary to take any action for the purpose of consuming gas prior to landing. Life preservers were distributed, in observance of normal safety requirements, but the emergency exit from the canopy was not opened. The aircraft landed with two engines operating at the required power* for landings, and a third engine available or bato Pf" """- ■i was required. AT NO TIME WAS THE AIRCRAFT OPERATED WITH ONLY ONE ENGINE. " y.e" advantages of the * Constellation type of aircraft is that it is designed to operate with only about half its total power. Considering that Captain Dunker had two engines running perfectly and another ready for immediate operation, it is not surprising that his landing was normal and routine, particularly with the use of his landing gear and brakes at all times. The aircraft used approximately two thirds of the runway length to slip after it made the landing, leaving approximately 1,800 feet of the taxiway untraveled. The amount of taxiing used was no more than normally required for a Constellation landing (Cont. on page 12, Col. 8).
Secretary Most Beautiful City Trujillo Arrived Yesterday on Goodwill Visit
By CARMEN REYES PADRO Redactors of EL MUNDO i ¿ s..*e.aua most beautiful of Ciudad Trujillo p-señoritu lisa Georgina Ariza Hernández- arrived yesterday in Puerto Rico in a gesture of gracious reciprocity to the visit that her colleague, the most beautiful clerk of San Juan -se-
nita Leonor Josefina Navas- recently paid a visit to the Dominican Republic. Apparently and to the rhythm of the modern and atomic era, nothing more natural than that it is also the woman who brings people together, as well as wills and hearts? Welcome, Miss Ariza! We extend our greetings to her companions, Misses Marta Sánchez Vidal, Luisa Amelia Hernández Bonelli and Brígida Coll, who came second, third and fourth, respectively, in the contest held by the newspaper La Nación, of Ciudad Trujillo, to choose the most beautiful secretary, on the occasion of the premiere of the film "Asi son las Mujeres", by Metro. As our readers will remember, this activity is a sequel of the nice contest sponsored by this newspaper EL MUNDO and the firm United Artista, for the month of April, in connection with the film "Secretarla Confidencial". On the platform At o'clock in the morning the Caribbean plane arrived with its precious car* ga, of good will. There was unusual movement on the platform of the air terminal, because, in addition to the numerous people who always come and go through the air, there was a large entourage to receive the ambassadors. It was headed by the most beautiful office worker of San Juan, Miss Leonor Josefina Navas, accompanied by her fiancé, young Georgie WiewaO, and the three candidates who followed her in the contest: Alma Sánchez de Látimer, Aissa Irizarry and Marissa Irizarry. Aissa Irizarry and Marla Monserrate Medina, each carrying a corsage of orchids for her colleague. Also present were the Consul of Santo Domingo in Puerto Rico, Mr. Francisco Pérez Leyba; the Vice Consul, Mr. Victor Isalas; Mr. Francisco Comarrazany and Mr. Germán Félix, Press Attaché and Chancellor, respectively, of the Consulate. Also Mr. Raúl Barreras and Mr. Robert L. Schmitt, managers of the Metro house in Ciudad Trujillo and San Juan, respectively. As the minutes flew by, the group of Dominicans anxious to welcome their compatriots grew. We remember the ladies Norma and Vllmn Catinchl, Carlos Pelleranos, Dr. Rafael Perez Lara. Julius Wardin, manager of Watkins Products in San Juan; Salvador Bernardini, correspondent agent of El Caribe newspaper, and others. With them, several Puerto Rican friends: Dr. Rafael Colón and Dolores de Colón and their son Rafael; do (Cont. on page 12, Col. 3).
k - PSC To Hear Pisicorre Drivers Also Sets Hearing To Discuss Train Company Petition After a recess of several weeks due to the intense work done to issue the new licenses to the vehicles destined for passenger transportation, and the illness of the Chairman, Lic. Jorge V. Toledo, the Public Service Commission began a meeting to discuss the new licenses. Toledo, the Public Service Commission will begin to consider the most important cases that have been pending public hearings, \ ■ For July 21, at two o'clock in the afternoon, the public hearing has been scheduled to consider the petition of some twenty drivers of guaguitas pisicorre, who request authorization to extend to Rio Piedras the route from San Juan to Martin Peña, via Fernandez Juncos. The group of petitioners is headed by Mr. Raimundo Lebrón, former president of the Transportation Authority Drivers and Mechanics Union. Lionel Fernandez Mendez, Esq. represents the petitioners. As will be recalled, these drivers requested reconsideration of the measure adopted by the Commission limiting the route along Fernándes Juncos Avenue to Martin Peña, alleging, among other things, that there are not enough vehicles on the Piedras route to provide the necessary service to the numerous passengers who travel daily on that route. It is also alleged that when the next school year begins, the situation will be more critical. Mr. Raimundo Lebrón said he hopes that the Transportation Authority does not oppose the request since their attitude should be interpreted as a desire to cooperate with the Authority in the effort to provide good service to the public, and not in the sense that they want to be their competitors in the business. It is expected that this public hearing will be attended by numerous people who have been protesting against the Authority's actions in the past few years.
Local Health Office Launches I . v.' Soon Sanitation Campaign
The local office of the Department of Health, in cooperation with the Government of the Capital, will soon begin a new environmental sanitation crusade, according to information yesterday from engineer Osvaldo A. Rlve' ra, who, together with engineer Miguel E. Martin, directs said office in San Juan. i Some time ago he mentioned them. । two sanitation officers reallza- . ron an intense work of environmental cleanup, to eliminate from the Capital's ca- - lies of ambu- > lenses sales. Now the campaign will be focused on cleaning up yards, garages, roofs, rooftops, and garbage rooms. The campaign will now be focused on cleaning up yards, roofs, rooftops, and the quarters of roo- * sldonclas and commercial houses. House-to-House Sanitation officers will go house-to-house for two weeks, inspecting places where there is a common accumulation of garbage, trash, garbage bins, crates and bottles. Any accumulation of objects that may harbor vermin and any uncovered containers that may be a breeding ground for mosquitoes should be eliminated. Be advised that notices should be posted so that the
The work should be carried out independently of the work to be carried out in the area and without any problems of accumulation of garbage. This work will be carried out independently of the cleaning and garbage collection work that the Municipality of San Juan carries out on a regular basis* The Mayor, Mrs. Felisa Rin. Gautier, has offered to facilitate the work of the sanitation officers. The Municipality of San Juan will provide two or three vehicles and personnel to collect all the waste that the sanitation officers de- cldecide should be disposed of. As this is a different task from the one carried out by the Capital's sanitation personnel, neighbors should not remove the objects to be removed until they receive the notice by mail. In this way, it will be avoided that this material is piled up in the hallways, thus avoiding the city. . In order to dispose promptly of all material to be disposed of, the (Cont. on page 12, Col. 8)
President Signs Bill For Homes
Circular Sent How to Apply Preparations Begun for Project to Begin Operation By Leo Nlehols WASHINGTON, July 5.-(PU).-E1 President Truman jubilantly signed the new public housing and slum elimination project today, and hailed it as a gift to millions of families living "in slum squalor." More than a score of congressional and government leaders witnessed the signing ceremony, which cemented this year's first capital triumph for the President's domestic program. Preparations were immediately set in motion to put into operation the vast new slum clearance, public housing and rural housing project - the largest of its kind ever attempted. The law provides for the construction of 810,000 units of public housing over the next six years, plus a >1,500,000,000,000 slum clearance program and 8325,000,000,000 for rural home improvement. Mr. Truman said he will immediately ask Congress for money to get the necessary machinery in motion. Federal home officials rushed out circulars that will inform local communities how they can put themselves in turn to receive the funds under the new law. Housing officials cited Detroit, Philadelphia, Chicago and New York as examples of cities likely to be the first to receive federal money for public housing and slum clearance projects. But many others will be eligible for early consideration. Seflor Truman praised the new law as one "of great significance to the welfare of the American people." He indicated that it establishes a national goal of decent and satisfactory housing as soon as practicable for every family. "These standards," the President said in obvious reply to those who denounce the measure as socialistic in type, "are fully consistent with American Ideals and traditions." New Perspective "They recognize and preserve local responsibility, and the primary role of private enterprise, in remedying the Nation's housing needs. But they also clearly recognize the need for federal assistance to supplement the resources of communities and free enterprise. ¿ "Opens the prospect of decent homes in healthy environments for low-income families currently living in slum squalor. It equips the Federal Government for the first time with effective medloz to assist cities in. the vital task of slum clearance and redevelopment of vacated areas." The President said the law also authorizes a "comprehensive program of Federal home study, aimed at the reduction of (Continued on Page 12, Col. ").
so every
Judge Suspends Trial of Pregnant Woman in Advanced Stage of Pregnancy
Judge Angel M. Umplerre, iel San Juan District Court agreed yesterday to suspend, with the consent of! prosecutor Zoilo Dueño González, the hearing of a bolita case "so that the defendant, who is about to become a mother for the sixth time, can have the baby at her home." The defendant in this case is Isabel Alvarez Diaz, a 40-year-old mother of two children, whom the Detective denounced alleging she had in her possession bolita material. The prosecutor Dueño Gonzalez filed the corresponding accusation. Due to her advanced state of pregnancy, Mrs. Alvarez Diaz had to be helped to climb the stairs of the Court, as she sat near the judge's bench, she was quite nervous. The accused told the prosecutor Due* ño González that she was making the shirts for the baby she was expecting, and he agreed to the requested suaprenslón "so that she would not give birth in jail, since the chances are that she would be found guilty". Judge Umplerre set the trial for September 2, 2010. Isabel Alvares Diaz is the third woman to appear this morning before the San Juan District Court to be tried for violation of the Bolita Law. The other two were Laura Quascurt and Regina Babilonia, who were sentenced by Judge Umplerre to 8 months in jail, sentences that were appealed to the Supreme Court. i * (Cont. on page 12, Col 8)
I I
AHA Reveals It Will Lend Farmers Credit
Agency To Lend Up To >$4,988,079 Includes Farm Purchase As Well As Repairs And Veterans Plan By BENJAMIN SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Farmers Home Administration, 'a federal agency formerly known as Farm Security, has $4,988,079 available for loans during this new fiscal year. This was explained yesterday by Mr. Celestino Matos, assistant director of the agency, who explained how to make loans for the purchase and renovation of farms. The AHA is authorized to insure loans for the purchase of farms, up to a total of >2,835,000, according to Mr. Matos, but local institutions are reluctant to enter into negotiations with the Federal Government, which guarantees the corresponding payment. The AHA has invited all small farmers in Puerto Rico who wish to improve the conditions of their farms and homes to borrow money from the funds authorized for this agency. During the past fiscal year, according to Mr. Matos, the AHA was unable to secure loans in Puerto Rico because there were no local institutions willing to provide the required facilities. According to the Act, in each state there must be local institutions willing to advance loans to farmers, upon payment of the corresponding interest and with the guaranteed signature" of the U.S. Treasurer. The Administration has been authorized to insure again for this new fiscal year, the same amount previously designated for the purchase of farms -$2,835,000. Both Mr. Matos and Mr. C. C. Stubbs, Director of the AHA, hope that this year it will be possible to secure some local institution interested in sponsoring these operations, by advancing the corresponding loans. Mhniréstamos de refacción agrícola, I" Administración 4o Hogares Para el Agricultor, headquartered at the Parada 8 farm stands, has >1,775,000 in assets. >378,079 to lend to veterans interested in buying farms. This -:ndo is directly appropriated by the U.S. Congress, so it does not require the interr-'t'llary signature of previous cases. v Labor Last Year During fiscal year pa4 -♦j. the AHA* had a budget of >1,654,290 for farm refurbishment loans to eligible farmers. They approved a total of 4,069 loans, fully exhausting the referred budget. They also approved 21 loans for the purchase of farms, using >150,195 of the direct funds allocated by Congress. Collections made during the past fiscal year amounted to $2,324,666.59. These collections correspond to renovation loans and loans for the purchase of farms, granted by the AHA in previous years, to farmers in the country (continued on page 12 Col. 7).
Muñoz Discusses Status Case With Barkley, Senate Leaders - .
Femós Declares That Puerto Rico Is In Practice A State .i ♦-■ " - - - - Expresses Links With The State .
(PU)The Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Dr. A. Femós Isern, declared with respect to the comments of the press on the island regarding the request of Governor Muñoz-Marin for the right of Puerto Ricans to draft their constitution, that "the political entity of the People of Puerto Rico is, in practice, a State, although not a member State of the Federation." Dr. Fernós said, "I do not understand how anyone can pretend to ignore the reality that: "1. Puerto Rico is a political body called El Pueblo de Puerto Rico, since the Foraker Act of 1900. 2, That as such body politic it has a republican structure of government that has gradually progressed in its democratic development until today, with the exception of the Auditor and the Supreme Court, the entire organization of the Government of the People of Puerto Rico obeys in its origin to the express will of the people. "That this political body lives in economic and political union with the United States. It reigns therein, with
'O -' DR. FERNOS A. ISERN few exceptions, the same laws as in the States forming the Union, as if Puerto Rico were also a state of the Union. "That while the people of Puerto Rico do not participate as well as the people of any State in the national councils, and participate in them only to a limited extent through your Resident Commissioner, et cler(Continued on page 12, Col. 7)
Small Military Plane Crashed Near Caguas Culberaton Pilot In Serious Condition. Passenger Not Yet Identified Died By NATHANIEL SOLTERO EL MUNDO Staff Writer A small Army plane, one of those used for "contact work," crashed yesterday around four o'clock in the afternoon in the San Salvador neighborhood of Caguas, seriously injuring its pilot, Lieutenant J. Culbertson, and killing a passenger, as yet unidentified. The pilot Culbertson, according to the Caguas Police, suffered a fracture of the entire frontal base, with internal hemorrhaging, and multiple contusions on his body. Yesterday he was transferred to San Juan in an ambulance that the Army rushed to Caguas. The San Salvador barrio is at a distance of eight or nine kilometers from the city of Cagues. From the road that leads to Cayey, to the site of the accident -in the middle of the mountains- it is approximately four kilometers. This made rescue efforts difficult and the body of the unidentified passenger had not been taken to Caguas by 7:00 last night. It was a single-engine plane. According to police authorities, the plane -a single-engine, four-passenger plane, known in the Army as an L-17- caught fire. Farmers who said they witnessed the tragedy told the Caguas Police that "the plane caught fire in the air," and that they saw "when the plane burst into flames, exploding in flames," and that they ran to the site of the tragedy. They added that they rushed to the crash site, and that they found (Continued on page 12 Col. 6)
Hearings Against Strato Freight To Be Held on Island JAC Lawyer To Argue Charges Also Against Pilot By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL EL MUNDO Staff Writer The hearings of the charges against the Strato Freight aircraft line and against Captain Wakefield, who was in charge of the plane that crashed in Punta Salinat, killing 53 people, will be held in Puerto Rico. Governor Muñoz Marín arranged for the Civil Aeronautics Board to hold in Puerto Rico the hearings of the charges against Strato Freight and against Captain Wakefield, who is accused of negligence in piloting the plane. It was argued that in Puerto Rico the case would have greater publicity and would facilitate the appearance of a greater number of witnesses, helping to obtain a more complete account of the facts. The General Administrator of Civil Aeronautics, Seflor Rentzel, has officially communicated the agreement that the hearings will be held in Puerto Rico, and has requested the Attorney General of Puerto Rico to provide an appropriate venue for the event. Le Coden Local The Acting Governor, Mr. Géigel Polanco, has placed at the disposal of the Civil Aeronautics Board the fourth courtroom of the District Court of San Juan, where Judge José M. Calderón usually acts. * The hearings will begin on the morning of August 8, 1949. He will come to Puerto Rico to sustain the charges against Strato Freight and Captain Wake (Continued on page 12 Col 5).
Rains Cause Flooding In Several Residential Areas
Heavy torrential rains yesterday, Friday, caused serious flooding in some parts of the metropolitan area, especially in low-lying areas of new housing developments. The abnormality was observed during a tour made by an editor of EL MUNDO, accompanied by our graphic editor, Lula de Cazenave. Although the streets of the Puerto Nuevo neighborhood in Rio Piedras did not appear to have been greatly affected by the rainwater, the entrance to the neighborhood, however, two of the military road leading to Bayamón, on the Matadero side, appeared to be covered by about two feet of water. On the other hand, the lower part where the residential neighborhoods Reparto Baldrich and Hyde Park, of Rio Piedras meet, also, towards the place where they border almost with the road to Phoepltal do Pclquictrís, appeared flooded, noting that in some places the water had gotten inside the residences. In Cali* Marti, in Ciudad Nue- - ; ; ;;
va, between Urbanización San José and Ciudad Nueva, in Hato Rey, Rio Piedras, some three blocks of that sector were flooded. The water penetrated inside the garages and in some parts inside the houses. The police authorities of Ha. to Roy, confirmed the floods caused by the rains, but did not speak of any event, or abnormality of drowning. Traffic disruption, etc.- due to the floods. The Heto Rey Police said that the Carpenter Highway that connects San Juan with Rio Piedras and the rest of the island, as a detour on Highway 1, was partially covered by water, but that this did not hinder the transit of motor vehicles. Normal in Bayamón Meanwhile, police authorities in Rio Piedras and Bayamón said, "everything was normal." Contrary to other reports that in the Bayamón area torrential rains cause rivers to flood, it was reported yesterday that "here in Bayamón it has not rained much.
Good Environment for the Constitution! Vice President Wants to Visit Island. -Senator-■ McFarland Would Give Support" By James F. Cunningham WASHINGTON, July 15 (PU) - Governor Luis Muñoz M&tÍm informally explained today the political status of Puerto Rico and the need for a constitution drafted by Puerto Ricans themselves to Vice President AlB ben W. Barkley and ten of the key senators. Sen. Dennis Chávez pri|B ed the stage by honoring Mr. Muñoz Marín with a luncheon at the quarters of Senate Secretary Leslie Biffle. In addition to the Vice President, the event was attended by Senate Majority Leader Scott Lucas of Illinois, Senator J. Howard MgB Grath of Rhode Island, the Democratic National Committee's Joseph C. O'Mahoney, of WyomingB chairman of the Interior and Insular Affairs® Committee; and Senators Clinton P. Anderson, of NuaB vo Mexico; Epessard L. Holland, of Florida; Claude Pepper, of FlorldaB Owen Brewster, of Maine; ErnesB W. McFarland, of Arizona; and AlexB ander Wiley, of Wisconsin. The atmosphere was one of intimacyB Muñoz, Barkley, and the Resident Commissioner sat together, cracking jokes as they ate with their plates on their knees. Barkley told Muñoz that it was one of the biggest disappointments in his life to have spent 36 years in Washington without a glimpse of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Hawaii, Alaska or the Philippines. He promised Muñoz, if possible, to visit Puerto Rico in December. And when he goes to the island, he said, he doesn't want to stay one of those overnight stays. He wants to stay long enough in Puerto Rico to really see the island, the vice president said. Undersecretary of the Interior Oscar Chapman and Assistant Secretary C. Girard Davison, were set to discuss Puerto Rico's problems with some senators in another corner of the room. Before Senator CháveB ordered lunch, Muñoz and FeB ; nós toured the two rooms of Blffie's suite. For more than three-quarters of an hour they talked to most of the senators about the problems of the political status of Puerto Rico and the desirability of allowing the people to draft their own constitution. After hearing the clone of the idea, Senator McFaiB land said he believed that no one on Capitol Hill would object to the people of Puerto Rico carrying out the idea, if they wished to do so. It seems a natural step, he said.B The U.S. is to give Guam a civil government, and there is no reason why it should not continue to grant Puerto Rico greater autonomy, McFaB land, a member of the Interior and Insular Affairs Committee, which would probably have to discuss legislation authorizing the Puerto Rican people to draft their constitution, said he is not watching to get the idea approved by the Senate. I Feel Nostalgia Before lunch Muñoz r<B¡;j ran the galleries, Senate and House, experiencing a serB j timlent of nostalgia. B| This tour made him 1 his days as a correspondent in W<B shigton, of the daily La In the antechamber of the Senate. Muñoz recalled that he had spoken many vecgs about " Puerto Rican politics. In the antechamber, senators met with reporters. Those were the days when a dead aSQ with the Vice President. senators and top officials of the Department of the Interior had been an important neB™ ticle for Puerto Rico. >- Governor Luis Muñoz MiB rin said he will not go to New YolB I tomorrow, Saturday. He said that the months (not sent by Prensa UnB da) that he would visit the city tomorrow were erroneous. 2 "Because of unfinished business still pending in Washington," said MuftoiB "I have decided not to go to New York tomorrow, and I cannot say when I will go. *Mr. Muñoz Marin has proposed to take other steps with congressmen, and also with the Drug and Narcotics Commissioner, who has said he is ready to lend his full cooperation to combat drug trafficking on the island. This action will include specifically marijuana, whose use has been denounced by the Governor. The seflor Mufloz Marín also has in mind to raise before theB authorities foderaks dio ersos prgU ■ Nemas of the agriculture and the Insular tria, related to 1H 1 aid for the same.