THE MIANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY i Pardal to occasionally cloudy, with some light showers, mainly during the* morning hours. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 7* degrees: low. 74, Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 o'clock at 1* o'clock, 80.07 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, "ñero 21. (PU) - Tempera tura": 38 degrees at Nine York. 38 at Wáshlngton, 76 at Miami and 82 at Chieagn. At La Guardia, at read 7 F. M.: clear sky, up to 800 feet, variable at 700 and 900; vlalbllldad I mile*, light" rain" winds from the east and northeast 19 miles per hour. During lea doa hours following "1 sky condition will be the same.
MARAÑA JOURNAL
YEAR XXIX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 22, 1949
NUMBER 13554
FIVE CENTS
Li Tsung Jen Takes Chiang's Office
Will Send Delegates To Communists GOP Accused U.S. Government Of Causing Departure Of Chinese Generalissimo By Arthur GOUL NANKIN, Jan. 21 (PU)- Genersllstm Chiang KaLshek today set out on the road to exile, after retiring on leave from the presidency of Nationalist China. to facilitate ln" negotiations with the Chinese Communists. Vice-President Li Tsurig Jen, an ardent supporter of peace. immediately assumed the presidency, and announced that he would dispatch as soon as possible a peace delegation to the headquarters of the Communist armies at Yenan. LI received the resignations of Premier Sun Fo and all the members of the Cabinet, but it is believed that he will not accept them. Chiang, who for 21 years ruled his people with an iron hand, bade farewell to his China with a 100-word statement, in which he expressed his confidence in the restoration of peace. The Generalissimo left NonIdn in his private plane Me| Ljng, so named in honor of his wife, ron bound for his home town of Fengchua, Chekiang province. His trip is believed to be the first step on the road to his exile in Formosa, where most of his personal effects are already located. From Fengchua, Chiang is expected to leave for Funchow, off the island of Formosa. In her farewell message, Chiang did not announce her resignation as President but used the phrase: "retirement on leave." Immediately after the Generalissimo's departure, Sun Kp met with his Cabinet in the Executive Yuan building. There the resignations were offered to LI Tsung Jen, who had assumed power by a brief statement, Doa hours after Chiang's departure, the Communist radio rejected the Nationalist request for an immediate cessation of hostilities, and said that peace negotiations had to begin before the cease-fire would cease. However, the broadcast appears to have been prepared before Chiang retired from the Government. It is believed that LI Tsung Jen and other dirlgents will immediately send a delegation headed by Minister Chang Chlh Chung to request the Communists to cease hostilities, and 'begin peace talks. Madame Chiang Toward China It is not known at this time whether Li Tsung will be officially appointed President* of the Republic. In his brief statement, Li said he was "obliged" to assume presidential duties under Article 49 of the Chinese Constitution. This article specifies that the Vice-President will take over the presidency if the President resigns or is otherwise unable to perform his duties. An official source said that aefiora Chiang Kal-shek, who is at present in New York, will soon return to China to join her husband in the disaster. Chiang, in announcing that he was going on leave, left the way open for a return to the presidency, should the peace efforts fail. In his farewell statement Chiang expressed the hope that the Communists would understand the national welfare, and protect China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as its culture, history, social order, and fundamental rights of the people. Chlang added: "I have devoted my whole life to the struggle for national unity, democratization, improvement of life and peace for the Chinese people. Realizing that without peace there can be no basis for progress and for the attainment of political reserves, I leave Ll Tsung Jen temporarily in charge of the Presidency." Another important event was the resignation of T. V. Soong as governor of Kwantung province. The resignation is presumed to be another step in Soong's efforts to return to the Chinese Foreign Ministry. Policy of Indifference Continues A dispatch from Robert Barkdoll, United Press correspondent in Washington, says the United States today clung to its policy of indifference toward China in the face of Republican allegations that the Administration's failure to help Generalissimo Chiang Kal-shek had forced him * out of the presidency of the Nationalist Government. The State Department did not officially comment on Chiang's departure "on vacation," but it is known that, in its view, Chiang bears the brunt of the blame for the recent victories of the Chinese Communist armies. American officials, from President Truman on down, have repeatedly called on Chiang to initiate vast programs (Continued on page 12).
President Harry S. Truman Kisses the Bible
I r tMHr 1 rl TJ 1 w mb I lints.
Poro after <lr having taken the Oath of Office, President Harry Truman (at tierochH, Bowed), hesa the Hlhlla used at the Inauguration in the
ceremonies held the day before yesterday in Wáshlngton. The other persons, from left to right: Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson; Charles E. Croplay, ofldnl"-
The other persons, from left: Presiding Judge Fred M. Vinson; Charles E. Croplay, ofldnl"-Croplay, and Vice President Alhen Barkley, who was inaugurated before Truman, (Photo by Associated Press),
Truman Said Soviet Was A Dictatorship President Asked For Help In Implementing World Improvement Plan rnr JOHN lTcÜTTER WASHINGTON, Jan. 21. (PlD President Truman said today that Soviet Russia is not a true communist state, but a dictatorship. The President was reported to have made the above statement at a breakfast hour rejoinder with friends and Congressmen from Miaurl, whom Jos asked for help in averting war through his world economic improvement program. f Mr. Truman announced his world economic improvement plan in his inaugural address last Thursday, in which he said that Communism is a threat to world peace, but he did not mention Russia by name. The congressmen who had breakfast with the President said that on this occasion he "spoke specifically of Russia, and described the difference between a true communist state and a dictatorship. The President, according to those who were with him, said that, in Russia, all authority is concentrated in the hands of a few men who decide what the people will have, whereas in a true communist state all people are treated as equals and share equally in all things. Elaborating on his world program of economic improvement, "eftor Truman said that the prosperity of the United States must be helped by improving the economic conditions of other countries. A Misurl congressman from Misurl de.¡aró (Continued on page 12)
65 Forces To Take Active Part In Vieques Maneuvers Along With Four Battalion Marines To Wade To Shore From Assault Ships In Attempt To Take Island. 5,000 Participate
U.S. Army units in the West Indies will play a major role in the Navy's Atlantic maneuvers to be held on Vieques Island from Feb. 14 through April 1 this year. This maneuver will be the largest held in the Atlantic since the termination of the Alvarez Abandoned Mayors Association Called Irregular Form Convened by the Association The Mayor of Rio Piedras, Mr. Augusto P. Alvarez, announced yesterday that he has dissociated himself from the Mayors Association of Puerto Rico. In an information given to the Press Mayor Alvarez stated that his resolution "is based on 'the Irregularity of the procedure used to convene the Mayors Association and would gather to turn it into a lobbying tool." Explaining the "irregularity" committed, Mr. Alvarez said "that Senator Ernesto Carrasquillo did not have the right to summon the assembly because he was not a mayor. "The citations," he added, "are always made through the Secretary. Not being president Je had to summon the Vice President or the Secretary." Mr. Alvarez asserted "that his responsibility as mayor makes it impossible for him to abide by the resolution of a minority of the members of the Association, since to do so would be to disassociate himself from the democratic prjctlca that should prevail in all civic and official activities of Ja current Ad(Continued on page 12)
The war, and the same includes amphibious landings on Vieques Island. This is the first time that a) 65th Infantry, now commanded by Lt. Col. Irving Lehrfeld, and the other organizations composing the Regimental Combat Team, will take an active part in landings of this nature. The First Infantry Battalion, stationed in Panama, is scheduled to arrive on February 14, and will join the 65th Infantry Regiment and the 504th Field Artillery Battalion in the operations. -The 2nd Special Engineer Brigade, destM "*** at Fort Lewis, Wáshlntgon, will send an Engineer party, which, accompanied by a detachment of Transportation from New York Harbor, will comprise part of the landing force. This Engineering group has already arrived on the Island of Vieques, and is in training on the Island. One of the most interesting aspects of the maneuver will be the participation of an enemy force, known as the aggression force, consisting of a specially trained unit equipped with equipment and uniforms that will identify them as the enemy during the maneuver. 8,000 on Maneuver This unit comes from its headquarters at Fort Riley, Kansas, and is commanded* by Colonel C. C. Sloan. It is estimated that approximately 5,000 Army troops will take part in the maneuver. On March 2, three battalions of the 65th Infantry and four U.S. Marine Infantry Battalions will wade ashore from the assault boats, occupy the enemy's beaches, and then attempt to take possession of the entire island. It is expected that they will meet stiff resistance from the defending forces, which are already on Vieques, preparing for the expected Invasion. The Army has been training for its part in this amphibious landing since early September 1948. Since that date officers and soldiers of the 65th Infantry Regiment have been receiving training in three preliminary maneuvers at the Salinas training range which were carried out at the Salinas training camp, and which were carried out at the Salinas training camp, and which were carried out at the Salinas training camp.
News Digest
The rehab plan outlined in the inaugural address is considered audacious. - - - Trun: an affirmed the Soviet is a dictatorship. * Interior to invest 87,800,000 in concrete roads; will not make North Avenue, - - - Life magazine dedicates an extensive report to Puerto Rico in its latest issue. - - - United States recognized the governments of Venezuela and El Salvador - - - - Monge was executed Thursday night - e - Today the Institute of Municipal Auditors and Treasurers takes place at the City Hall. - - - The moratorium on conscription may continue. é - - - - 'Trio Jíbaro' passed in coach from Puerto Rico. - The Ramio, plant discovered in Florida, can be used by the textile industry. - Dr. Lambert arrived to collaborate with the University in the establishment of the medical school. - - - The legislators will be able to collect their salaries as of January 2, according to the opinion of the Attorney General, - - - - Senior Augusto Alvares disassociated himself from the Mayor's Association* - - - - There is the purpose of coordinating the social services of health and recreation for children and youth.
lud and recreational social services for children and youth. - ♦ - Vice President Ll Tsung Jen takes Chlang's seat. - - - - There was a shooting between Czech* and American soldiers, on the German border. - - - Dr. Manuel submitted to the Higher Council of Teaching a Report on the teaching of English. - Boston confirmed higher taxes on non-resident income. - The public hearings regarding the distribution to the refineries were concluded. - - - Justice asks to expedite cases in which police officers appear as witnesses. - is Dean Acheson was sworn in as Secretary of State, assuming his duties immediately. * The March of the Fleeces begins tomorrow on the island. - e e - The United States, and other countries, ask for the freedom of Indonesia. - e - The Army announces requirements for second lieutenants. - The Army announces requirements for second lieutenants. - - Attorney Clark said there is no room for communists in the government. Forces of the "8th Infantry will take part in the Vi "qu" maneuvers. .
Legislators to be paid as of Jan. 2
Employees Must Wait For Telegrams Can Be Used - Géigrl Answered Auditor By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL Editor of EL MUNDO It has already been decided that the members of the Legislative Assembly, elected in the last elections, may receive the compensation provided by law as of January 2, 1949, regardless of the date on which they take the oath of office. The oaths may be taken before any officer authorized by law to take oaths. Extraoflcially, it is assumed that most of the officers and employees* of the Legislature will not be able to collect their "habere" at the end of the month, unless there is an extraordinary session of the Legislature. Appointments made on the basis of a single omnibus appropriation budget are illegal as to employees of the Senate and House of Representatives. Attorney General Vicente Géigel Polanco, in an official opinion issued yesterday, states that the members of the Legislative Assembly elected in the last elections are entitled to receive their salaries from the date on which their term of office began. The opinion also clarifies that, as of January 2, 1949, the date on which the term of office begins, the legislators may be sworn in individually before any official authorized to take oaths, without having to wait for the Legislative Assembly to meet in ordinary or extraordinary session. The Solicitor further states that the legislators may legally use, as of January 2, 1949, the $350 allowance which by law is allotted to each legislator for the purpose of sending telegrams. It is my opinion that legislators will receive their pay from January 2, 1949, although the oath of office is taken on the day the regular session of the Legislature begins. The Attorney General has not officially expressed an opinion on the right of employees and officers of the Legislature to draw their pay from a line item in the budget; but he stated that the procedure used in these appointments, as far as he has been able to see, is illegal and the Auditor is justified in refusing to authorize these payments. The only alternatives are: 1- To convene the Legislative Assembly in extraordinary session to validate the actions of the presidents of the chambers; 2- To delay the payment of these salaries until the Legislative Assembly meets in February and takes the necessary measures to pay the salaries of these employees until this salary is paid. There is a belief in governmental* circles* that legislators will wait until February 14 to take the oath of office, although they can legally do so before*. Taking the oath earlier or waiting until that day will not alter the amounts to be received as compensation since, according to the Attorney General's opinion, the Auditor will pay salaries* as of January 2, except for* those* legislators who were holding some other public office until a later date. Legislators who were mayors will begin to be paid from January 10, when they became mayors.
Boston Confirms Higher Non-Resident Income Tax Rate
BOSTON, Jan. 21 (FU) - Individuals whose income is derived from Puerto Rico but who do not reside on the island may be subject to higher income tax rates, according to a Puerto Rico Supreme Court decision that was affirmed by the Boston Circuit Court of Appeals today. The entire issue revolves around interpretations of the Island Income Tax Law, as amended, which imposes a higher rate of tax on net income derived from sources within Puerto Rico of U.S. citizens not residing on the Island than the rate imposed on net income derived from the same sources of U.S. citizens residing in Puerto Rico. Supreme Court Ruled Before
But the treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael Buscaglla, objected and appealed to 1*r* *nt" 1* Boston Circuit Court of Appeals, Antea 8* Habí" Revocado Before taking* action here, however, 1* Puerto Rico Supreme Court r "vocó "e "11* miim* in another c**o, and "estuvo que 1* ley er* válida. This was* what Treasurer Buscaglia contended. In view of this action, the Court of Appeals found that it had nothing to decide as to Buscaglia's appeal. The* opinion states that "we are in substantial agreement with the views expressed" in the exhaustive opinion of the Supreme Court of Puerta Rico and find no need to add anything further to what was expressed in the opinion. Ordered the Court of Appeals the reversal of the decision of the Puerto Rico Supreme Court, based on the invalidity of the statute, according to said "Up tribunal Iniular lo soituvlera orlgmslmsnt." ■- S" ordered the case to be remanded to the Supreme Court d" Puerto Rico "for further proceedings" not lneon*lat "nt "i with "ita opinion."
The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico had previously held that income tax discrimination was no longer valid, and therefore, decided * based on this reasoning the case of Antonio Ahumada Valdes who worked for the International Telephone Company and had a home in the United States.
Interior Department To Build Reinforced Concrete Roads
Monge Relied On Clemency But Dewey's Pardon Didn't Arrive The 25-Year Boricua Veteran Was Declared Dead At 11:15 Thursday Night - He Showed No Emotion - Priest Accompanied Him -
For LUIS CASTRÓ QUESADA Editor of El. Jorge Luis Monge, young war hero of the United States and decorated three times for meritorious action on the ballistic fields of Europe during the Second World War, was confident until the last moment that he would succeed in rescuing his life from the death chamber of the Sing Sing penitentiary. The United Press summarized the last moments of Jorge Luis Monge as follows: "Jorge Luis Monge, 25 years old, and another man condemned to death were executed last night in the electric chair at Sing Sing for the robbery and murder of a Chilean sailor, Guillermo Orlando Torres Nunez, in New York City in November 1946, "The other two men executed were Eugene Tanno! Pannol entered the death chamber at 11:01 P. M. (Eastern Daylight Time), accompanied by Father Thomas J. Donovan, a Catholic chaplain. He made no remarks of any kind. He was pronounced dead at 11:03, "Grant was the second to die. He also made no statements as he walked to the chair accompanied by Rev. Luther K. Hannu, Protestant chaplain. Luther K. Hannu, a Protestant chaplain. He was pronounced dead at 11:10 a.m. "Monge was also accompanied by the Municipal Auditors to Meet Today Municipal Auditors and Treasurer's Institute will be held at Casa Alcaldía San Juan at 9 a.m. Today, Saturday, at Casa Alcaldía San Juan at 9 a.m., the Municipal Auditors and Treasurer's Institute will be held at Casa Alcaldía San Juan at 9 a.m., called by the Auditor of Puerto Rico. The objectives of the institute, as reported, is to "orient the new municipal treasurers and auditors in the work they are to assume during the next few years". The invitation has also been extended to auditors and treasurers who have held such positions in past administrations. The auditor of Puerto Rico, Rafael de J. Cordero, informed that "a thorough knowledge of the Municipal Law and the Accounting Regulations are essential factors for the Municipal Auditor to be able to determine the correctness of a proposed disbursement and for its books and records to reflect at all times the nature of the operations carried out. Mr. Cordero says: "Existing regulations require that these officers prepare and send to this office budgets, ordinances, cash reports, annual financial statements and annual liquidations. This documentation is carefully examined by the personnel in charge of municipal affairs and serves as a basis for countless purposes arising from the study of the various aspects of the administrative, economic and financial problems of the municipalities. Program Today's events will begin at 9:00 am. Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, "dmlnl "tr*dora rie 1* Capital, will make the "aludo to the visitors. Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, Auditor of Puerto Rico, will be in charge of introducing the event. Mr. Gerardo Dávlla Bloi "c, Head of the Budget Section* of the Bureau of Municipal Affairs, will speak on the "Preparation and Execution of the Budget" (Continued on page 12).
.i íKhF- '' > - * i' ■ - > " ♦ * '* * B; * i i M ' < ii-,' JORGE LUIS MONGE ■ do a !n camera dr Is by pnrirt" Donovan. With his eyes fixed forward, he did not show the slightest emotion when the guards tied him to the chair. The current was applied and he was pronounced dead at 11:15." On one of his last visits to the prisoner, Monge 1" told his attorney, Oscar Gonzalez Suarez, the following; (Continued on page 12) "Life" Publishes Report On Island Devotes Seven Pages* To Inauguration* Event In Very Optimistic Tone NEW YORK/January 21. (PU) - In this week's edition of Life magazine, in a seven-page illustrated article, attention is drawn to the growing publicity Puerto Rico has been receiving in the mainland press not only as a "problem" but as a tropical land suitable for vacationing and an emerging industrial area. Life, which has the largest circulation among North American magazines, features an article on the front pages of the most prominent edition under the title "A New Puerto Rico Emerges. . Rpjn a photograph of the representative float rie education, which paraded in Ir pararia inaugural celebrarla at the beginning riel current month in San Juan, Life gives account do l" election riel Governor Luis Muñoz Marín. For olios (Puerto Ricans)," the magazine says, "the Inauguration of Don Luis was the most important event of this century. It meant that the Puerto Rican relief program, which is beginning to work, will be carried out by a man who has devoted his life to it. It meant a new deal in the "portfolio" areas and the "slums". On the other pages are various photographs of Puerto Rico, among them a full page is dedicated to Governor Muñoz talking with former Price Administrator Leon Henrierson on the beach at Luquillo. A full page is devoted to "the details" of the Inaugural celebration. Two pages - with photographs of the Puertqq Rico project, the unfinished Caribe Hilton Hotel, the Caonillas Dam, the Puerto Rico Clay Products Co. and the University of Puerto Rico's vocational workshops - are devoted to the demonstration that "the Island is beginning to en(Continued on page 12)
Treviño Found Guilty of Second Degree Murder
By Lula Sánchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer Last night at 9:17 a.m., the jury in the trial of Joaquín Treviño, Jr. for first-degree murder in connection with the death of Corporal FrancHco Rloi of the Insular Police returned a guilty verdict for second-degree murder. The jury had been deliberating since* 4:20 o'clock in the afternoon, with an Interval of one hour and m"_di*^p*r*r*eating. Deipué* d" receive*" the verdict by 1* Court and read the same to the defendant, Judge Suarez Garrlga asked Treviño what he would *1
release him until Monday when he was to be sentenced. "Go home," was* the defendant's reply. The magistrate then released him, under the same bail he had given, until Monday at 9 o'clock in the morning when "the sentence will be read to him. The prosecutor resumed his turn in rebuttal yesterday morning, after the Court had resolved the question relating to the prosecutor's demonstration of the manner in which the defendant Treviño took the revolver from the bait Rios and made the dlspero*. Le defense, he had objected * that the prosecutor used for the de* (Continued "n le pg. 22)
Will Invest in Plan S^Syo,000.00 Will Offer Cooperation . S. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Department of the Interior will use native cement in the construction of future roads on the island, which will be made of concrete instead of asphalt, in the near future. Yesterday reported pj Comlslonsdo of the Interior, Mr. Jorge J, Jimenez, that he has held a conference with representatives of Puerto Rico Cement Corp, and Ponce Cement, to Jos effect" Ja request them quotations on the cement that will be needed for the construction rie this class rie roads. Special Price Special Price Last June, the Committee on the Interior requests that the quotations be received from the aforementioned firms, which will have to make a special request to the Department of the Interior for cooperation in carrying out the extensive government program for the improvement of the island's system of public roads. I i -. Mr. Jiménez stated that the quotations must always be made to the Department of the Interior, which in turn will pass them on to the contractors who are to carry out the work, in accordance with the terms established by the Department in each case. The quotations "were made on the basis of bulk cement, exclusively dedicated to road construction, taken from the factory by the contractors" who execute the works". Government program With the approval of the use of concrete in the construction of future roads," culminates in success the" ge "* t ions carried out" by Commissioner Jiménez in Washington, during his last visit to the federal capital, aimed at using federal funds in such" works" Among the" advantages" indicated" with this procedure," they mentioned "greater use of local materials," such as cement and gravel, and a decrease in the cost of road maintenance, since the roads have "become more durable. At the present time there is in Puerto Rico a stretch of road several kilometers long in the Cayey area, which was built by the Federal Government during the war. This has been maintained in excellent condition since its completion several years ago until the present. Among Commissioner Jimenez's plans in connection with the construction of concrete roads on the island, as he explained during his visit to the Public Highways Administration and the Public Works Committee of the Lower House, is that of helping the contractors to start this new activity of the Department. According to what he said on that occasion, the Island Government could acquire the necessary construction equipment and lease it to the contractors on the basis of working hours, until such time as they could acquire their own equipment. Seven Milliona At present, the Department of the Interior has plans for seven and a half million dollars worth of road construction. Also during his recent visit to the federal capital, Mr. Jimenez discussed with the Co* missionan of Public Roads, Mr. T. H. McDonald, the plans of í Puerto Ríen to put out to bid 1* construction of these roads" worth seven and a half million dollars. k* North Avenue "I don't believe that a government official should be constantly "obr" a single issue," said Interior Commissioner Jorge J. Jimenez yesterday, regarding the construction of North Avenue. When questioned about the clarifications of Dr. Rafael Picó regarding the need for the construction of said road, made before the Lions Club, the Commissioner of the Interior stated that he did not wish to comment further, adding that in his opinion "he has already said enough". La Cree Unnecessary As will be recalled, the Commissioner of the Interior, in information published in this newspaper last September 9, reported that, "although this avenue is of great importance to improve the urbanization of Santurce, it is not at the moment, as a road of communication, of such urgency that other roads of equal or greater need could be put in better condition than they are at present for public transit. . Also on this occasion, Mr. Jiménez said: "The expropriations "in that section would cost about 81,000,000. It would not be worth InutllU fique to invest the amount of money it will cost, when (Continued on 1* páiins 12)