THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST WU THE ISLAND. BOY: Partly cloudy becoming cloudy during scattered showers and some thunder this afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 85 degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level. at 4:80 p.m., 89.94 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Sept. 9. (FU) - At 1a o'clock today m recorded the following temperatures: Chicago, 80; Miami, 98$ New York. 84$ wishington, M. Predictions for tomorrow in Nine York and cities veeüiee: Weather mostly sunny and pleasant $ temperature mAa near 75: moderate wind* from the North.
DAILY TOMORROW
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter* Foot Office, San Juan, P. B. '
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RIGO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1949
NUMBER 13780
FIVE CENTS
Amnesty on Registration of Firearms to be granted
1 Gun Carrying Penalty Increases Senate Approves $60,000 Allocation For BCG Vaccination The Senate approved at last night's session a bill that provides an amnesty for all those persons who own firearms and have not registered them in accordance with current law. This bill, S. P. 22. to amend articles 7 and 9 of Act 14 of July 8, 1934, was under discussion on the floor of the Senate from 5:30 p.m. until after 7:40 p.m., and practically all the speakers present at the session took part in the discussion. New Record. The prolonged discussion was motivated by an amendment submitted by the speaker Celestino Iriarto to the effect that the Chief of the Insular Police should make a new registry, in a book duly filed and sealed, and not in the current form of card holders. Mr. Iriarto said that at present it is impossible in the courts to determine promptly whether or not a gun is duly registered, because the card books are not complete, for the most part. He also exposed the danger that one of said cards may be lost or exchanged for another, and referred to several cases that have occurred recently, in which persons in possession of firearms, with the corresponding receipt in their possession, despite having registered them in accordance with the Law, did not appear in said card holders when they were consulted in the Court, to determine the Registration. The majority voted in favor of the Senate's amendment, and when it was put to a vote, it was approved. The approval then produced an immediate reaction from the President of the Senate, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, who was on the floor. Quiñones, who was on the floor, called for the reconsideration of the vote in a fiery speech. Quiñones explained that the amendment of Senator Iriarto approved by his colleagues to completely override the existing legislation on the registration of firearms. He explained that it implies that the Chief of Police will be forced to make a new registry of firearms, and that the bill only granted 60 days, after its approval, for the owners of unregistered firearms to do so. He indicated that in sixty days the Chief of Police could not complete a new registry of all the existing arms on the Island, and that therefore there would be the problem that once the sixty days expired, all persons who did not register their arms would be exposed to a minimum jail sentence of six months, not being their fault for not registering them if at the end of the sixty days the Chief of Police, with the scarce clerical personnel at his disposal, did not complete the registry. He spoke to Senator Quiñones for more than an hour to convince his colleagues of the need for a rectification of the vote. Finally, the bill was reconsidered, defeating Senator Iriarto's amendment which had been approved shortly before, and approving the bill with other amendments submitted by Senator Lionel Fernandez Mendez. If the bill becomes law, as sporadic, the persons who have not registered their firearms will have a term of sixty days to do so, without incurring in any violation of the current law. In its article 6, the bill approved by the Senate states: "Any person who has in his possession, for any reason whatsoever, any firearm, on the date on which this Law enters into force, has the obligation to declare it in writing to the Chief of Police of the District where he resides, no later than the thirtieth day after the day on which the last publication of the edicts ordered in article 9 of this Law is made. Section 9, to which the preceding paragraph refers, reads as follows: "The Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico shall publish, weekly, during the thirty days following the day on which this Act becomes effective, in two newspapers of the largest circulation on the Island and on the radio stations of the Island of Puerto Rico, an edict informing the public in general of the grace period granted by this Act for the declaration of firearms and calling attention to the last day of the period of grace. The persons affected by the mioma have to declare the firearms they had in their possession or dominion". Anooliid Presides The session was chaired by ol se(Contigúa on Page 14, CeL 9),
BCG Shipment Expected Today Pons Discussed General Vaccination Plan, Girls' Home To Begin By Luis Hernandes Aquino EL MUNDO Staff Writer Only thirty-seven girls out of the 116 at the Island Home reacted negatively to the tuberculin test. The remaining 68 percent were positive, indicating that they already have some natural immunization against tuberculosis. The shipment of BCG vaccine to be used next week was not received yesterday and is expected to arrive on the island this morning from New York. Yesterday, at the home of the Puerto Rice Medical Association, Dr. Juan A. Pons, Dr. Harold S. Barret and Dr. E. Garrido Morales discussed the BCG vaccination program with the Chiefs of Public Health Units, Medical Officers and Hospital Directors, as well as with other members of the medical class. Next Monday begins the BCG vaccination of the inmates of the Hogar Insular do Niñas. Only the 37 girls who tested negative for tuberculosis will be vaccinated. These girls again received another tuberculin test, this time of 10 units, (Continued on page 14, Col, 3) 3 Members Of A Family Found Dead - Firefighters Respond To A Fire In The Fall. 2 Others Found Wounded i MAYAGUEZ, September 9. (PU) i (By Ricardo VlUamiD- When the firemen of Mayagüez went to extinguish a fire at number 158 Padre Aguilera Street, in the Santuree neighborhood, at seven o'clock this morning, they found the macabre spectacle of three persons dead and two seriously wounded. The fire, which did not acquire great proporo", was immediately smothered, and while this work was carried out so Iban identifying victims. Lying in the middle of the living room, the firemen found the body of the girl Hilda Rivera, who had been stabbed in the belly and had suffered serious burns. In the first room of the house they found the body of the girl's father, Liberato Rivera, who had his head smashed in. The bed was full of blood. In an adjoining room was found, crossed in a small bed, the corpse of the wife, Dionlsla (Niela) Angleró de Rivera, who had received serious burns. His body did not present wounds Incisas neither contusas. Children stabbed also appeared stabbed" seriously, the" child" Angel Rivera, do 11 years, who presented 17 wounds in the body, and Silvia Rivera, do nine years, who presented 18 wounds. The latter died an hour later at the Municipal Hospital. Angel remained there yesterday afternoon, in extremely serious condition. Immediately at the site of the tragedy were present lieutenants Carlos Ramos and Emilio Quiñones, police and detectives, and the chief of the latter, Marcos A. Vega. In the house will be occupied, a bloodied brown, a bloody kitchen knife, a bloody kitchen knife, a (Continued on page 14, Col. 2)
Chamber Intervenes To Enforce Action Against Cañita Rum
Dr. Mussenden Fined $25 ♦ She Was Jailed On Judge Polo's Order. - By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ Editor of EL MUNDO Dr. Rorlnquen Mussenden, who was incarcerated last night for three hours at La Princesa jail in San Juan, was sentenced yesterday morning by Judge Luis R. Polo to pay a $25 fine for contempt of court, or in default of payment, to serve 25 days in jail. The arrest of Dr. Mussenden was in charge of the marshal Dolores Solero, who was expressly designated to proceed to arrest her and take her to jail, if she did not pay the $5,000 bail that was set for her. At 5:30 p.m., Marshal Sotero went to the Medical Center in Santuree, where the doctor works. According to Mr. Sotero yesterday, when she "bumped into him, she asked him if he was the doctor, and he answered in the affirmative. Then she asked him: "Are you coming to arrest me? At first, according to the San Juan District Court official, the doctor said that she did not want to go to jail. But he answered that he would have to take her with him, much to his regret. Then the doctor invited him to go with her to Judge Polo, who had issued the order. They both went, in her car, to the Court, but the judge had already retired. The marshal asked her eqtanees to continue to the jail, to which she agreed. Once in jail she spoke with the warden, Mr. Balbino Gonzalez, who made her see that she was detained. From then on, the doctor was extremely nervous, tearful and in a bad mood. She immediately asked to be allowed to speak by telephone from jail with Judge Polo, who was at his home in Rio Piedras. From jail, the detainee, according to the marshal, rebuked the magistrate, appearing very nervous. The judge asked her if she had a brother there to go and get a release order, and she answered in the affirmative. At about nine o'clock in the evening, #1 Judge Polo gave the brother of the detainee a letter, in which he ordered her release without bail, but warned her that she should be in court early the next day, she said in short Dr. Mussenden is single, young and attractive. She expresses herself fluently and naturally, and has a great command of the Spanish language. When she was approached by reporters yesterday at the District Court, speaking lightly, nervously, she said: "I don't want to say anything, leave me alone. Maybe I'll become a lawyer. The doctor testified yesterday morning in the trial for which she had been summoned. It was a rape case, in which the defense attorney was Rubén Gaztamblde Arrillaga. After testifying, Judge Polo asked her why she did not appear in court, despite having been legally summoned on several occasions in person. She explained that a marshal had called her on the phone and had called her in person. (Continued on page 14, Col. 6)
Traffic Expert . > r s i&i ? : JIX - Jt ílu HENRY W. HANF. Henry W. Hane to Study "E1 Mundo" This Newspaper is the First on the Island to Apply for Admission to the ABC Henry W. Han", Field Auditor of the ABC (Audit Bureau of Circulation) is in Puerto Rico for the purpose of studying the circulation of EL MUNDO and determining who qualifies as a member of the ABC. The ABC is a non-profit cooperative association of advertisers, publishers and advertising agencies whose sole function is to certify the circulation claim of major publications in the United States and Canada. In all, nearly two thousand periodicals of all kinds have been certified by this organization. Leading propagandists and news agencies around the world dismiss circulation claims for newspapers and magazines unless the ABC's familiar stamp accompanies the "number". So strict are the ABC's rules that any newspaper accepted as a member is assured of high acceptance among toa propagandists who insist on authentic" paid circulation figures before placing their advertisements. EL MUNDO is the first newspaper in Puerto Rico to be considered for proper certification as a member. However, Cuba and Mexico already have representation. In Mexico City, El Universa!, a daily newspaper, and El UnlvarFdl Gráfico, an evening paper, are eertlflojtdo" by ABC. In Cuha there are six members. El Mundo de 1a Habana is the only newspaper, but there are five magazines attached" to the ABC. Sen these Bohemia, Carteles, Vanidades. El'll V Romances. Mr. Hane came to Puerto Rleo after his studies in Havana and Mexico City. Mr. Hanas is a native of Marion, Ohio, and comes to work out of the Chicago office of the ABC. However, for the past four years he has been involved with Latin American newspapers. Through these associations he has acquired expertise in speaking Spanish. He recently ceased with a Cuban spinster Hilda Maya. Based on the discussions inl(Continued on page 14, Col. 7)
Dr. Mussenden Defends herself ¿ II 11 A M I 3R xi'Á HI >1 Emi i | Á-j josjkJ k v III V f I B/ * i í? i ' ' ' V > ÜMH M&St I iBKMt BfiUl ■ ¿ AS ' : lE'W I I io -M d B
A graphic strip captures various aspects of Dr. Borlitquon Mvaaondon's appearance before Judge Luis R. Bolo of the District Court of the District of Jvaai yesterday morning to respond to a " u.
s<4n of deeacato to the Court for which she was arrested the day before yesterday. The young Dr. Musaenden, who pleaded guilty to having been taken to La Prineoea jail on her knees, was sentenced by the magistrate to the payment of a fine.
K* the magistrate to pay a fine of $25. Her appearance has been required in several neasione" in connection with a case in which she was a witness. (Photographs from EL MUNDO, by Caaonave)
Senate Authorizes Amendment To Law Provides No Prosecution In Cases In Which Persons Did Not Comply With Rule By Joeé M. García Calderón EL MUNDO Staff Writer After heated debates, the House of Representatives approved yesterday two bills, increasing the severity of penalties for the crimes of carrying weapons and the manufacture and trafficking of clandestine rum. In the bill that amends the law of carrying weapons, it is provided that when the weapon or instrument has been used to commit or in the attempt to commit some other public crime, the penalty shall be from 6 months to two years of imprisonment. The most discussed bill was P. C. 15, which amends the Beverage Law. This measure provides that "any person who has in his possession or at his disposal in any place, products subject to tax under the beverage law, on which the tax has not been paid, with the exception of those persons duly authorized by this law, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished with a fine of not less than $400 nor more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a minimum period of 6 months and a maximum of 1 ' year for the first offense, and for the second and subsequent offenses, shall be punished with imprisonment for a minimum period of 6 months and a maximum of two years. Clauses of the Bill The same bill provides that any person who has in his possession or custody or at his disposal in any manner, whether as owner, lessee, bailee, or keeper or in any manner whatsoever, an assembled or disassembled still which is not registered in the office of the Treasurer; or who impedes or hinders the free inspection thereof by an internal revenue officer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $750 nor more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a minimum of 6 months and not more than 1 year for a first offense: and for second and subsequent offenses shall be punishable by imprisonment for a minimum period of 6 months and a maximum of 2 years. Francisco Diaz Marchand, who together with Rafael Torrech and Casimiro Ramos voted against the measure, obtained the elimination of a provision that provides for severe penalties of fines and jail for those who knowingly consent to the operation of stills within their properties. This last section of the measure began to jeopardize its approval, and a motion was approved -which was later reconsidered- so that the bill would remain pending to be considered in the ordinary session of the Legislature next year. Representative Diaz Marchand tried again to postpone the bill, making the motion that the "hill" progress. The motion was voted by voice, and since the opponents were in the majority, he offered as a compromise the total elimination of the amendment that would be proposed to Article 85 of the Beverage Law, thus obtaining the approval of the bill by majority. During the course of the debate, Representative Díaz Marchand alleged that the measure, as it was drafted, constituted a serious risk because it could become an instrument of oppression and tyranny. Díaz Marchand clarified that he was not against the persecution of the manufacture of clandestine rum, but that the House should not act with festination on such a delicate matter. He also said that the bill could have bad political consequences. Representative Ortlz refuted the allegations of his majority colleague, saying, among other things, that the People's Party is not for the protection of pot stills. Before recessing the House, floor leader Ortlz announced that a public meeting would be held at 4:00 p.m. today to consider bill number 32, which provides means for the execution of the law declaring * the power plants to be public service companies. The bill, which is expected to be discussed by farmers and sugarcane producers, provides for the imposition of a tax of 1 cent for each five cents of raw sugar produced in Puerto Rico. This contribution -according to the bill-, provides that the tax shall be paid into the general fund and the Legislative Assembly shall annually allocate from it the funds necessary for the implementation of Act 221.
|A Priest Has Paralyzed The Services
Father Torres, of Salinas Alleges Machinas and Picas Block Church By Benjamín Santana EL MUNDO Staff Writer For the first time in Puerto Rico, a priest of the Roman Catholic Church has suspended the religious acts indicated in the program of the festivities during the celebration of the patronal feast. Father José Torre", of the Parish of La Momerrate, of Salina", alleges that he has felt the need to adopt this measure, "disgusted by so much paganism". The parish priest of Salinas has postponed the rosary and novenas until after the festivities are over, when there will be a more Christian atmosphere. Father Torre" alleges that they have blocked the Church with "machina" and pikes, and that in front of this" last acts occur "at odds with morality." This parish priest was also the first to introduce black "angelito" in the "altare" of the Church, on the Island, inspired by the "verse" of the poet Andres Eloy Blanco, Blocking the Church Explaining that he has been forced to suspend the religious "acts" in the temple of Salinas, while the patron saint festivities are celebrated, Father Torres sent us the following telegraphic communication yesterday: "I feel disgusted by so much paganism that is noted in the so-called civic activities that are carried out on the occasion of the patron saint festivities. "Before the attitude of the Municipal Administration of ignoring the Committee of Festivities designated by an assembly of the people; "Before the procedure followed in the execution of such festivities; - "Before the refusal of the Administration to leave the Church book of pikes, temples and machinas, where they interrupt religious acts like novenas, masses, funerals, processions, etc.)- "Faced with the contemptuous attitude denying our .tataala due cooperation páffrBTtranquIla, devout and solemn execution of the religious program; "Given this situation, I have been forced to suspend the religious activities do the" parties, which I will resume next week, with a more Christian atmosphere." Torreo not only denounces the fact that the Church has been blocked with pikes, machinas and "other pagan artifacts". He also denounces the fact that the men who take care of the pikes sleep on them, and in the mornings he is seen, in minor clothing, "giving an unedifying spectacle that is repugnant to healthy morals." He also denounces the fact that from early in the morning until dusk, and even late at night, the pikes are invaded" by dozens of school children" who leave their pennies "in these places of exploitation". He alleges that the Municipal Assembly passed an ordinance prohibiting the operation of such picas, but that the police have been unable to act because the ordinance - passed at their behest - does not contain penalties. Father José Torres Rodríguez, one of the few native priests that the Church currently has, was born in San Sebastián. He studied Humanities at the former Concillary Seminary of San Juan, then went on to St. Benedict College, Atchinson, Kansas, and St. John's Homo Missionary, Lltlo Rock, Arkansas, where he did his priestly studies and those of principal teacher of the high school. He was the first priest ordained by Monsignor Allosyius Willin (Continued on page 14, Col. 1).
Captain Benitez Greets His Daughters
I 9L jJg । ' ■''Be / A ' A v'" f RS'mMHIMMMHkMI Captain Rafael Benitez, a Puerto Rican who has just been praised for his bizarre conduct during the sinking of the submarine Cochino (which he commanded), is pictured greeting his daughters Nancy (right) and Criaste in Grotton, Connecticut, as they return to his side. The sinking of the Cochino occurred in August in Arctic waters, and Benitez was the last to abandon the ship after exhausting all efforts to save her. The Puerto Rican officer is the son of Ponce Municipal Judge Celestino Benitez. (Associated Press Photo) Non-Residents Must Pay 15% On Passes Federal Tax Must Be Paid By People Who Buy Them Here, To Travel From U. S. By Enrique Ramírez Brail EL MUNDO Staff Writer
Airline and shipping tickets issued in Puerto Rico to persons residing in the United States are subject to the federal tax of 15 percent of the value of the tickets, by order of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue in Washington, D.C., Mr. George J. Schos
According to Mr. Jesús Palé" Díaz, in charge of the Federal Internal Revenue Division on the island, it was the custom of some U.S. residents to buy a ticket in Puerto Rico to travel to New York or another point on the continent and then return to their place of departure without having to pay the 15 percent federal tax. The Federal Government made a decision last Friday on the purchase of airplane, train and bus tickets in foreign countries to avoid paying the 15 percent transportation tax. Mr. George J. Schoeneman, with his order, especially affected Puerto Rico. It is alleged that it is possible to purchase airline tickets in Cuba, Mexico or Puerto Rico for transportation between two points and return to the United States without paying the tax. Mr. Schoeneman contends that the United States tax applies to payments made by mail, telegraph or other means, such as payments made in the United States. It is not legal, however, to go in person to foreign countries and make such ticket purchases. Receives Instructions Following a report published in the Miami Herald of September 3, in which it is stated that the Federal Commissioner of Internal Revenue in Washington has issued orders to proceed to collect the federal tax of 15 percent on the value of tickets sold outside the United States to persons residing on the Continent and traveling abroad or in the territories of the Nation (Mr. Jesú" Palés Díaz, President of the United States, has been instructed to report that the Federal Commissioner of Internal Revenue in the United States has issued orders to proceed to collect the federal tax of 15 percent on the value of tickets sold outside the United States, to persons residing on the Continent and traveling abroad or in the territories of the Nation. Jesú" Palés Díaz, in charge of the Internal Revenue Division in Puerto Rico, to the question" that 1, we formulated answered: "Indeed I have received a cablegram with Instructions in the sense that the persons that (Continued on page 14, Col. 7)
Yesterday," ' Could not Jurtir Yesterday the Group . Of Counsel o - ---- Munoz Nq Cited Court.Gentlemen Magistrates i ! They "wait for Order in Vain i - The" new" lawyers" who were "summoned" to be sworn in yesterday morning before the Supreme Court of - Puerto Rico were unable to do so, because Governor Luí" Muñoz Marín did not summon the Court to an extraordinary session. Both the Court, which opened its doors at nine o'clock in the morning, as well as the new attorney and the families who went to pre-arrange the ceremony, waited for the convocation until half past ten in the morning. At that hour the judge who was to . preside, Mr. Robert H. Todd. i son, from the bench" stated to the , concurrence that it was not going to be po- . slble to be sworn in on the day. He said that the Court believed that the convocation was to be signed by the Goherna- , tior, but that "owing to certain , formalities beyond our reach at the Fortaleza, it has not been possible to get the convo- ! cetorla signed." He expressed that he regretted this very much, "especially for those ' who had come from the Island." ! New Convocation Added Associate Justice, Mr. 1 Todd, that the Governor had a । new convocation, and that as soon as it was signed, all । applicants would be notified of the date of the oath to- , ma of the oath. He emphasized that on this occasion, the clta- , cion was issued when the Governor had already signed the convocation. As the Supreme Court is i on vacation , the law requires that in order to convene it must be specially eon- . vocated by the Gov- [ r.ador. The convocation in this case , was sent to Gov. Munoz i (Continued on page 14, Col. 4.)