THE NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS PASA LA ISLA, BOY" - Partly cloudy with some fairly scattered showers: in the vicinity, during the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - high, M degrees: low, 70 degrees. Sea level bsrometric pressure, at 4:30 ds tsr- , da, 10 inches do mercury.
NEW YOU, open! 38. (PU). - In the afternoon today ae report aigulantaa temperatures: Chicago, 88; Miami, 81$ New York, 53; Wáahlngton M, Prediedonee for maAaaa in New York and neighboringudadea*: increasing haziness, temperature máa alte; cerca da 85, viantoa modaradoa from the South bada oí Eote.
MARANA NEWSPAPER
ASO XXX
Entered as second class matter, Peet Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SABADO 30 DE ABRIL DE 1949
NUMBER 13651 FIVE CENTAVOS
Sugar Prices Firm
Agriculture Asked To Revise Estimate Consumers Believe They Can Stop Further Rise In Price Levels By PAUL* HARRISON Washington, April". - fpu" - A two-weekend "news" report last weekend that Rico's sugar cane harvest will probably "be even higher than originally estimated (t.274.000 tons, instead of 1,235,000.) and despite the fact that the increased quantity has forced some Puerto Rican producers to sell perhaps more than they needed in order to have available supply for future storage, the price of sugar in New York has been holding steady and has even risen a few points. Yesterday's gross price was 35.60 per hundredweight, as compared with the closing price of the "emana kick of 35.57, The -aforas Industríale" in this capital attributed the firmness of the price to the present quantity for distribution. Major Distribution - The Department of Agriculture reported yesterday that, although the primary distribution in the continental United States during the week ending April twenty-third was slightly less than that of last year at which time the market was running smoothly after a weak index, the annual distribution to date is more plentiful than that of the corresponding period in the IMS. The Department reported that total distribution for the period January 1 through April 23 of this year amounted to 2,085,915 tons, compared to 1,729,545 tons for the same period last year. Distribution during the week ending April 23 was 118,030 metric tons, compared to 124,103 metric tons during the same period last year. The production taxpayers in this capital calculate that distribution until the end of this year is running at the rate of about 7,600,000 tons annually, not counting the expected increases in distribution in the period from May to August. Industrial consumers are already aware of this, and have interviewed the heads of the Department of Agriculture and called the attention of Secretary Brannan to this fact, and suggested that the time has come when the national estimate of sugar consumption should be increased to avoid any sharp increase in prices. The national consumption estimate is currently 7,250,000 tons. *< At the present time, the Department apparently has no intention of satisfying the demand of industrial consumers because their arguments have been counterbalanced by those of the producers, who claim that even with the recent declines in the cost of living index, the price of sugar is still one cent lower than the general price index mandated by the Sugar Law. In other words, according to sugar producers, the gross price of sugar in New York should be around 83.75 per hundredweight, instead of its current 85.75. Meanwhile, the latest information to the effect that any changes in the quotas of the various producing areas will not be made for another month and perhaps not until the end of the summer. This will complicate the problem of the Puerto Rican producers somewhat unless, in the meantime, the Department of Agriculture can decide how much of the Puerto Rican production should be declared surplus and sold through the European Recovery Program and how much of the surplus should be held in reserve to be added to the next year's production. In the absence of this information, producers face the problem of trying to determine how much they will be able to sell in the next one or two months, warning that the abundance of sales will weaken the market price.
Committee To Expand Social Security WASHINGTON, April 29. (PU)The House Ways and Means Committee decided today to begin work next week on a comprehensive new social security bill. The Committee finished its hearings yesterday, and members agreed today in a private meeting to begin drafting a bill next week, probably on Thursday. Members have already rejected President Truman's request for the needy program, but are expected to go to some extent on the President's request to extend old-age insurance and to increase the boneficws.
Muñoz Signed Bill On Reorganization
Authorizes Governor To Make Changes In Government Agencies As of yesterday, the Governor has the power to reorganize the executive departments, agencies and authorities of the Insu. lar Government. Senate Bill 476, by signature of the Governor, became Act 140 of 1949. By this act the Governor is authorized to examine, when he deems it advisable, the organization of all executive agencies and departments of the Government and to determine what changes are necessary to promote the better execution of the laws, the more efficient administration of the executive branch*, reduce waste and promote economy; to increase the efficiency of the operations of the Government. The Governor may - group, coordinate and consolidate agendas and functions of the Government; reduce the number of agendas by consolidating under one head those having similar foundations and abolish those which he believes are not necessary for the efficient conduct of the Government. How It Shall Be Law May transfer all or any part of an agency or of its functions to a department and may reorganize all or any of the executive departments. The reorganization plan agreed to by the Governor shall be law unless the Legislature passes a concurrent resolution rejecting it. Under this law, in contradiction to other laws, it is the Governor who approves the reorganization and the Legislature which has the power of veto. Any reorganization plan must be submitted by the Governor within five days of the commencement of a regular session of the Legislature. In cases of special sessions, the plan must be submitted to each of the members of the Legislature within five days of the commencement of the regular session of the Legislature.
Foreign Rulings Valid on the Island The Opinion Was Rendered By Judge Calderon Of San Juan Court
By ANGEL CRUZ CRUZ Editor of EL MUNDO Politically, the People of Puerto Rico is constitutionally empowered to uphold its own "principles" of private international law, regardless of the "doctrine" established by the United States Supreme Court, even if they are not the same as the federal statutes applicable to the island. This was resolved yesterday, for the first time in our jurisdiction, by Judge José M. Calderón, Jr. of the San Juan District Court, when he determined that the courts of Puerto Rico may recognize the valid "sentence" handed down by a foreign court. The foregoing doctrine was "MENTIONED in the case of Bernardo Ponce v. F. Badrona - Jr. The case involved the enforcement, in Puerto Rico, of a "judgment rendered in favor of the plaintiff and against the defendant by a Court of the city of Buonoi Ai. res, in the Republic of Argentina. The defendant requested the dismissal of the lawsuit for failure to allege facts constituting a good cause of action. This thesis was supported by the theory established by the United States Supreme Court in the famous Hilton v. Guyot case (159 U. S. 113, 1895). In this case, the principle known in Private International Law as the principle of reciprocity was adopted for the first time as a national judicial doctrine. In this case, the National Supreme Court denied recognition to a judgment issued by a French court, on the grounds that French courts did not recognize judgments of foreign courts, and therefore should not extend to that nation the courtesy (comity) of recognizing the judgments of foreign courts, and therefore should not recognize the judgments of French courts.
Pinero Conferred with Perón on American Problems
Attended People's Event Hosted by Argentina's First Lady. Uruguay Management
----- 4 By Luis Hernándos Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO Upon his return from South America, where he stayed for about a month, he informed the former governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T. Plfiero, that he had lectured with Perón on American problems. Plfiero, to have conferred with the President of Argentina, Juan Domingo Perón, on American problems. Mr. Plfiero also conferred with the President of Uruguay. Luis Battle Borros, on the possibilities of a commercial exchange between that republic and Puerto Rico. Governor Plfiero returned last Thursday from his visit to the South American continent, where he was on a mission which he reported to be "as a private citizen", but "in which he had the opportunity to see these high personages of the mentioned republics. During yesterday morning Mr. Plfiero had a conference with the Rector of the University of Puerto Rico. Don Jesús remained in the Rector's office, accompanied by the Rector's assistant, Mr. Emilio Colón, for about two hours. When he left the Rector's office accompanied by the Rector and Mr. Colón, we approached him. Although the "efior Plfiero spoke sparingly, he revealed interesting facts about his trip to Uruguay and Argentina . Geattonea in Uruguay Mr. Plfiero said he was in Uruguay for a few days,
fsenBaMiiaMHnninannBBnmnnnmni f^\. s Aw JESUS T. PINERO having the opportunity to meet with President Luis Batllo Berrea, with whom he talked about the possibilities of a commercial exchange between Uruguay and Puerto Rico. Don Jeaúa also met with several businessmen and industrial leaders about this exchange. He expressed that the prospects are (Cont. on page ¡8, Col. 8)
All indications are that the blockade in Berlin City will be lifted within the next ten days.
*7* . B . ..
Philip C. Jessup (right), U.S. Ambassador-at-Large, smiles as he leaves the Soviet general quartet at the United Nations in New York, New York, on the 27th of this month.
York, on the 27th of this month, after addressing a note to Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Jakob A. Malik, asking him for a formal statement regarding the date
and in nd id "nee that Russia will lift the blockade in Berlin, Germany, Jessup is followed by an aide of the EMado Department (at Left). (Associated Press Photo).
There Are Counterfeit $10 Bills In Puerto Rico
Morales Otero Explains Reasons That Forced Him To Resign
Says He Wasn't Consulted About Approved Bill, Breaking With Columbia University By WILLIAM DORVTLIJER WASHINGTON, April 29. (Special to EL MUNDO)--Dr. Pablo Morales Otero told EL MUNDO today that he had resigned as director of the School of Medicine in San Juan, with his resignation effective tomorrow (April >'J0).
U.S. Secret Service Gives Instructions on How to Identify Them
The U.S. Secret Service in Puerto Rico yesterday informed the country's businessmen and merchants that counterfeit U.S. Federal Reserve 310. bank bills are now circulating in the island. The bank bill in question is described as follows: United States Fe. decaí Reserve Bank Note rie the denomination of ten ($10). against the Federal Reserve Bank rie of Boiton, alendo the reverse riel lario clisé number. 1102. These bills bear a capital "A" inside a circle consisting of the word "Federal Reserve Bank, Boston, Massachusetts": the number corresponding to the "read "A" on the back can be found in small type in the lower right corner of the bill. Blurred Lines This bill has Hamilton's portrait printed on it and the lines of both the face and hair are blurred and the portrait itself when compared to Hamilton's face on a bank bill (Cont. on p. 16 - Col. 8).
Dr. Morales Otero tendered his resignation to Dr. Willard C. Rapplye, Dean of the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, on Tuesday, April 27. Dr. Rapplye said that he "felt compelled to accept his resignation with deep regret. Dr. Morales Otero added that Dr. Enrique Koppisch would be named interim director during the "temporary period while Governor Muñoz Marín signs Senate Bill 493 to create the School of Medicine in Puerto Rico." "I told Dr. Rapplye that rte "e "e "ua that my responsibilities would end on April 30," said Dr. Morales, "so that I would be immediately relieved of any part of responsibility in the de", truoclon of the autonomlai of the School of Tropical Medicine. Dr. Morales is here attending the meeting of the Tropical Diseases Section of the United States Public Health Service, to which he was appointed by Dr. Leonard Schellc, director of the United States Public Health Service. This section meets four times a year to study requests and make recommendations for the allocation of federal funds for medical and scientific research. During an exclusive interview with EL MUNDO, Dr. Morales Otero said: "The reasons I have for resigning are: first, because I do not approve of the procedure for submitting a bill to the LeCont. on page 14, Col. 2.
éK" 1 ■ III II Hoy se Agasaja La Ancianidad En el Escobar La Alcaldesa Presidirá El Reparto de Regalos A los Viejecitos Pobres Hoy a la" nueve de la mañana en el Parque Sixto Escobar rie Puerta rie Tierra. The Mayor of the City of San Juan and Santurce will be in honor of the "old people" of Sao Ju "n and Santurce, in commemoration of the "Day of the Old Age". ? The act will be presided over by the Mayor of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón ris Gautier, who will proceed to distribute among the elderly 10,000 packages containing clothes and other articles of per "onal utility. Previously, the Mayor has informed that he will give each elderly person a one dollar bill. Today's hedge aeré enlivened by conjunto" musicale". Other Municipal Events It was also reported in the Municipality yesterday that tonight at eight o'clock there will be an extraordinary session of the Board of Commissioners of the Capital. At said session the Board rie Commissioners will consider the lists" of merchant" and indu "triale" rie the municipality, "ujeto" to the collection of patents, ✓ It also has in mind con(Cent, on page "6, Col. 5)
Fire Causes Loss Amounting to Over $100,000 in Jayuya
Five houses and part of the Catholic Church in Jayuya were burned to the ground" in a fire that "developed yesterday morning at 9:45 a.m. in Jayuya. According to reports supplied from Jayuya by Mr. William Fred Santiago and Mr. J. Norat Rodriguez, the fire originated in the house of Bernardo de Paz, when an electric stove caught fire. It was reported that the losses amounted to more than $3,100,000. The Borin* quen hotel of Margot Toro, the Café Patria of Carlos Rivera, a coffee shop of Ceferino González, a grocery store of Alberto Olive: ras and the Amparo Pharmacy of Manuel Mercado were totally destroyed, and according to Norat Rodriguez, the municipal garage also caught fire. He also said that the house of Bernardo de Paz, 11 ae de do" planta".
11 ae of two" floors" and that in the lower part of the house there was a furniture store that was burned to ashes". It was reported that the first firefighters to arrive at the scene of the . I ainieatro were the" of Utuado. Later arrived the firefighters from Adjunta, Arecibo and Ponce, the latter under the command of Chief Alberto Gándara. H The Police, with the help of the people, reportedly made a heroic effort, having organized volunteer firemen to extinguish the fire while the 7 pumps of the Island Service were arriving. The Police were under the command of Chief Modesto Eitrada and the volunteer firemen under the command of Mr. Jesus Davlla. i It was further revealed by "1 sefior I (Cont. on page 16, Col. 4) |
The Kremlin Sent Definite Notice. Russian Delegate Invited Jessup to Receive It, Without Disclosing Contents Pnr BRUCE W. MUNN . NEW YORK, April 29 -- (PU) -- Jacob A. Malik, Russian delegate to the United Nations, received today the Kremlin's "final notice" of the lifting of the Berlin blockade, and invited U.S. Ambassador Philip C. Jessup to receive it. The diplomats met him at the Russian offices of the United Nations, on Park Avenue, amid general optimism that the response would result in the termination of the blockade and a meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers to discuss German problems. The meeting began at four o'clock in the afternoon. The indications were to the effect that the blockade, which has isolated Berlin for over ten months, would be lifted within the next week or ten days, and that the foreign ministers could meet in Perls during the last week of May. Malik's Demand That" Indications were strengthened by Mallk's demand in the General Assembly Steering Committee today that the current session of the Assembly should end no later than May 18. That would give diplomats enough time to reach Paris in the last week of May. Today's American meeting, the seventh since Jetiup and Mallk began their "Informal Exchange" on February 15, was arranged by Mallk, said Porter McKeever, chief press representative of the American delegation to the United Nations. He was going to the funeral McKeever said that Jesiup v". ni* o* Washington, where he was conferring yesterday with Secretary of State Dean Acheson, to Norwalk, Connecticut, to attend the funeral of his wife's uncle, former Senator Frederick C. Walcott. As he entered the office of the U.S. delegation to the United Naelons, while waiting for another train, he received a phone call from Mallk's office. Jesiup then canceled his plans to attend the funeral. Malik and Jetsup met last mlércolea. The Austrian diplomat, it is understood, gave assurances that Britain, France and the United States would end the blockade of the city's western borders and agreed to participate in a conference of foreign ministers of the four powers to discuss the German occupation. There were no hidden obstacles to this meeting. But Mallk informed Jeisup that he had to await the official concurrence of the Soviet foreign minister, Andrei Y. VIshins in Moscow. Therefore, the call for today's conference cannot mean anything other than that he has received notice from his capital. Asked whether he had received a final answer from the Kremlin. Malik answered cryptically: "I always have what is needed. Journalists told him that . the American delegation has announced this afternoon's meeting. "Oh"- said Mallk-"then they have broken a promise." But he smiled as he said that. Churchill Confident of Victory
Believes Conservative Victory in 1950 Certain LONDON, April 29. (PU)-WlnK ton Churchill today described as "good" his Conservative prospects for a victory in the 1950 general election. The former British minister addressed some six thousand Conservative members at a Conservative League rally and said the Socialists' confidence was shaken by victories in recent county council elections. Churchill said there was every indication that the Conservatives' chances in the next election were good, adding that the Labor party had damaged its own prospects by its proposals to nationalize more British industries. Churchill, who is a "master" of the Conservative League, introduced former Minister of Foreign Affairs, Senior Anthony Eden, as the main speaker and praised him as "my friend and colleague and comrade through many years of peace and war.
Troops Set Out In Pursuit Of Quezon Widow's Killers
MANILA, April 29 - (PU) - It was reported today that troops of the Philippine gendarmerie in the number of a thousand have gone out in pursuit of the murderers of the widow Manuel Quoson and have skirmished with the rebels at a short distance from the scene of the tragic shooting. In Manila, about a hundred thousand Filipinos lined the route of the funeral procession to pay posthumous homage to Mrs. Quosón, widow of the first President of the Philippines. Ignoring the tra* dition, President Elpidio Quirino accompanied the coffin of the deceased in the official ceremonies. In a special radio broadcast, Quirino asked the people to help the government "eliminate the last vestiges of anarchy and savagery" in the islands. He said that hiding the rebels would only be "cowardice and treason". He added that the bandits had apparently planned to rob and murder the group, because they allowed the automobiles to pass through.
Quetón, hijn extinct President- I" te -Cor* Aurom A widow Ha Otipuon i au I nxj" ta ir aurom aPFFcnw , quir* ' nw were MeoinadM also, i
Aid Will Be Given To Underprivileged Students
Instruction Sets New Scholarship Plan To Be Paid From Annual Fund S40,000. Includes Schools Both Zones By BENJAMTN~SANT AN A Bed "8tor Of The. MUNDO Thousands of poor children whose attendance at school is difficult due to lack of clothing, shoes and other items may receive aid from the Department of Education to study in public schools in Puerto Rico. These are scholarships for students with limited economic resources, who will receive assistance from the Government as of the next school year, by virtue of a measure approved by the Insular Legislature and already signed by the Governor, which provides 840,000 for these purposes. The bill was introduced in the Senate by Samuel R. Quiñones and Ernesto Carrasquillo and is entitled "an act to create a scholarship fund for proficient students of public schools, both in the urban and rural areas, who lack the economic resources to pursue their studies. According to the text of the law, it provides, among other things, that: "A special fund is hereby created for the granting of scholarships to poor students in rural and urban public schools who have demonstrated a high level of education. This assistance may be of a varied nature, according to the needs of each student, The value of the scholarships may be applied to the purchase of textbooks, clothing and footwear, to cover living expenses or transportation, or to any other similar purpose, which will help the students' school work and their punctual attendance to classes. "The granting of these scholarships shall be governed by regulations to be promulgated by the Commissioner of Instruction, in accordance with the purposes and in accordance with the provisions of this Act. "To carry out the purposes of this Act, the sum of one thousand dollars is hereby appropriated annually, beginning with the fiscal year 1949-1950, from any funds existing in the Island Treasury not allocated for other purposes. The annual sum so authorized shall be placed by the Auditor and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico at the disposal of the Commissioner of Instruction. "This law, being of an urban character, will become effective on July 1, 1949," Commissioner Pleased * The Commissioner of Instruction, Senior Mariano Villlaronga, said he was very pleased with the action of the Legislature and the Governor in passing this law, which will help so much our underprivileged children. He explained that one of the reasons why there are so many school-age children out of the classroom is the lack of clothing, shoes and food. He added that, even among those who go to school, especially in the rural areas, there are many who go to class without shoes and in ragged and patched suits. Eitai scholarship," he continued, "I will prevent hundreds" of them from "giving in the middle of the road in au ca (Cont. on page 18, Col. 8).