THE
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Generally cloudy, becoming clear in the evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - Maximum temperature, 91; minimum, 87. Pre" barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:0® o'clock this afternoon, 29.28 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Nov. 11. (PU). - Today afternoon m reported the following temperatures: New York, 72: Chicago, M¡ Wáohlngton, 68; Miami, 79. Forecast for maflana in New York and neighboring cludode": Cloudy and much cooler than today, with the highest temperature between M and 80. Moderate winds from the east to the northeast.
DIARY OF^SSSÉ'LA MARANA.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, Poet Office. San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1949 NUMBER 13843
FIVE CENTS
Columbia To Work With Instruction
Professor McKenzie Discusses Teaching Report with Governor By BENJAMTN~SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Columbia University Teachers College will collaborate* with the Department of Instruction in the work of putting into effect the proposed reform of the Island's school curriculum. The report of the study made by a group of educators from that school was delivered to the Commissioner of Instruction last Monday, personally, by Dr. Gordon McKenzie, director of the study. Commissioner Mariano VUiaron. will shortly reveal* a summary of this report - the main conclusions of which are already known. The document will consist of 350 pages when printed. In the meantime, Columbia University and the Department of Instruction will remain in close liaison during this school year, so that by next year it will be possible to implement the reform. Both the Department of Instruction and Columbia University are very confident that the National Congress will approve next year "a generous allocation of federal aid for instruction on the island. McKenzie's efforts During his visit to the island, Dr. Gordon McKensle, director of the Columbia study, conferred with the Governor, the Commissioner of Instruction and other officials of the office. One of the matters discussed was that related to the publication of the complete report, for the information of the island teachers. It was agreed that the Columbia University Press will be in charge of this task. This first edition will be distributed to supervisors of instruction, government officials whose work is related to schools, school superintendents and principals, and others. , , . It was further agreed to work out a plan whereby the collaboration of Columbia University would be feasible to put into effect the recommendations of the report. "The Department of Instru. ction," said Villlaronga, "will maintain a close relationship with Columbia University, through Teachers' College, to take advantage, as far as possible, of its valuable advice." That means, Villa, ronga added, that Columbia will submit* its own plan to implement the recommendations of its report, and that it will often send its technicians to advise the ac* officials. Main Conclusions The following are some of the main conclusions of the Columbia pedagogues, according to the preliminary report submitted to the committee, which was presented to Mr. Vlllaronga: 1-All school-age children on the island should receive at least some elementary education "if a minimum level of effectiveness in the learning of fundamental concepts, hygiene habits, and standards of civic conduct is to be achieved. Does Puerto Rico need a higher level of general culture, as a means to increase its pro-, .ductlvldad. 3. It is necessary to reduce failures, mainly at the elementary level, "as a measure of economy, mine," and to assure the admission to school of the greatest possible number of children and to avoid the emotional dislocation "of those who see their hopes failed." 4-The laymen should be given a greater share in the actslvldes of the school, the community being used as a laboratory.' 5-There is a great need for social and psychological In. vestlgaclon in Puerto Rico, "for better educational píanlflcation." 8-The school program is unduly bookish and academic. (Contln.ua on p. 14, col. 2) OUR SATURDAY SUPPLEMENT On the occasion of our recent circulation and in response to insistent public demand, some thousands of copies of this Saturday supplement will be published entirely in black, as opposed to the bulk of the edition, which is printed in black and color. We have already given corresponding orders to adequately increase the printing of the supplement in color. In the meantime, we will respond to our public in the manner already indicated.
Governor Muñoz Marín Received New Cemetery
■BK WWW 1 111 Ww The ' 7 ■. B£f3|O a y. rJaB WI I "3 ■ Et - i ■ - F - Bofe \ " i*. J "■<
Tx>s engravings present a view of the many personalities who retired on the occasion of the handover of the National Cemetery. The top photograph from left to right, shows the instant when Lieutenant Colonel A. J, O'Relliy, Army Chaplain, gave the invocation. In reverence are Governor Luis Muftos Marin, General Herman Feldman, and his wife; General Edwin L. Sibert; Speaker Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl and his wife. Photo Below, from left to right, Chief Justice Angel R. de Jesús; Mrs. Clara Luz de Quiñones; President of the Island Senate, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones; Mrs. Tula de Fernóz Isern, and the Resident Commissioner in Washington, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern. (Photos EL MUNDO).
Judge Delgado Acquits Ponce Colleague Muñiz Ramos, Ponce Municipal Judge Pedro E. Muñiz Ramos, was acquitted in the Second Chamber of the San Juan Municipal Court, presided by Judge Alma Delgado, of an alleged crime of violation of a traffic ordinance of which he was accused. The acquittal of Judge Muñiz Ramos occurred when Judge Delgado declared a question of law raised by Rafael Hernández Matos, defense attorney for the Ponce municipal judge, to be admissible. Muñiz Ramos was accused of an alleged violation of Ordinance number 18 of 1949, approved by the Board of Commissioners of the Gobler of the Capital. The issue raised by the defense attorney was based on the occurrence of the facts that the defendant was accused of, which, according to the complaint sworn to that effect, took place on October 1, 1949, and the ordinance under which the aforementioned complaint was sworn, went into effect on October 12, 1949. Judge Delgado declared the question of law admissible, ordering the case to be filed and dismissed. History of the Caao Judge Muñiz Ramos was charged with the facts of October 1. (Continued on page 14, Col. 8")
Cemetery Located Hato Tejas Is Delivered By Gen" Feldman Holds 6,098 Bodies, Was Built At A Cost Of $465,000.- Imposing Ceremony By Rurlco E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO Governor Lu 1 * Muñoz Marín accepted yesterday, on behalf of the People of Puerto Rico and in a ceremony that took on great solemnity, the offering of a new national cemetery that through Gen" H'rman FcMman Melera the Federal Government.
The new National Cemetery,' located in Hato Tejas. Bayamon, is an engineering project completed at a cost of $465,000. It covers an area of 19 acres, having been designed to receive, for the time being, some 6,098 graves. Sentiment of Gratitude Upon receiving the new National Cemetery offering from General Feldman, Quartermaster General of the United States Army, who came to Puerto Rico expressly to participate in this ceremony, Governor Muftoz Marín expressed the following brief words of acceptance: "Since more than three quarters of a century ago, Abraham Lincoln dedicated a cemetery in Puerto Rico. Abraham Lincoln, dedicated a cemetery of soldiers killed in combat, in consecration of a great principle of freedom, impossible to add anything in words on an occasion similar to that one. "I do not attempt to do so. Our sentiment is better expressed by recalling Lincoln's words at Gettysburg than by trying in vain to express it through our own. "Therefore, through me, the people of Puerto Rico, with a deep sense of gratitude, join in this occasion and express their recognition of our country's great contribution to the cause.
The Engineers Hold Annual Meeting The President Reports Achievements of the Entity. "* They Celebrate Social Events By Rurlco E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The Engineers began to celebrate yesterday its twelfth ordinary assembly, which will continue today and tomorrow, Sunday. Hundreds of engineers and their families gathered in the new building, which will house the offices of the College of Engineers, located in the Eleanor Roosevelt development. In various "Jugare" of the building "e showed different" exhibits of Industrial firms. Welcomes At nine o'clock in the morning, engineer Charles Lienza, president of the Commission of Social and Cultural Events, welcomed all those present. Among other things, he said that "this professional organization has now completed eleven years since it was created by an act of our Legislature. "The most outstanding achievements of that period," he said. - "have been: the payment of policies to the heirs of deceased members; the payment of pensions to those who are no longer able to practice and have no other" adequate" income; and the construction of this building to house our administrative, professional and social activities. "For the first concept", - he added. - "payments have been released to date in the amount of $47,450.00; for the second $21,481.74. Further on, Mr. Lienza said that another important project was the project of building lots for engineers, architects and surveyors. In this regard, he commented that "we can look to the future with the confidence that one day very soon what we have already begun to call the City of the Engineer will begin to be built in this area". Orlando Mendra speaks The president of the College of Engineers Beñor Orlando R. Mendez, addressed the attendees, recounting the work resumed since he has been occupying 1* leadership of that group of professionals. Explaining the steps taken for the improvement and defense of the profession, Mr. Orlando Mendez said that "the classifications of the Personnel Board for surveyors, mechanical engineers and chemical engineers have been the subject of a detailed study and general discussion at our monthly meetings. "We have had before us (Continued on Page 12 Col. 5)
Russians Against Jews
Hebrew Demonstration Motivated Violent Campaign in the Soviet
By Joseph NEWMAN PARIS- A short time ago, in the autumn of 1948, the city of Moscow witnessed an unauthorized popular demonstration, one of the very few since Premier Josef V. Stalin came to power. It took place on Rosh Hashonah, Jewish New Year's Eve, in the Moscow synagogue. Members of the Israeli Legation, headed by Mrs. Golds Myerson, had just arrived to open the first mission since Israel proclaimed its independence and established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. They were invited to attend religious services at the synagogue. When Mrs. Myerson and members of her mission arrived, they were surprised to find large numbers of Jews gathered in the street in front of the synagogue to greet them. They were astonished at the experience that followed "1 reception. There was a passionate and almost hysterical outburst of feeling. Jewish men and women burst into tears. They wept as they gave cheers and shouted aloud: "We have waited our lives for this! For Larael! Tomorrow for Jerusalem!" Fearing the consequences of this unauthorized demonstration in the streets of Moscow, the Israeli delegates quickly retired to their rooms at the Metropole Hotel. The demonstration was repeated a week later on Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement.
pur, the Day of Atonement. There is good reason to fear the consequences. Russian Jews, by publicly proclaiming their desire to go to Palestine, have been guilty of something that is considered disloyal to the Soviet regime and the Russian state. Disloyalty of this nature, in the eyes of the Soviet rulers, is a crime almost tantamount to treason. In the same way that the Jews claim that there can be only one God, the Soviet leaders claim that there can be only one state to which a citizen gave allegiance. Soviet Reaction Soviet leaders were quick to react. They warned the Jews in Russia, numbering perhaps three million, that they would not be allowed to leave for Israel, abandoning the Soviet Union. The warning took the form of a campaign to terrorize the Jews into abandoning the hopes they had so spontaneously shown on Rosh Heshoneh and Yom Klppur, resigning themselves to the rest of their gods in the Soviet Union, under a dictatorship. Jews accused of having led the demonstration were locked up. Many others were cross-examined by the police and terrorized. Then the Soviet Police raided and liquidated the only two Hebrew printing houses in Moscow - the Einhelt newspaper and the publishing house (continued on p. 14, col. 1).
U.S. Physiologists Urge Production of BCG Vaccine on a Commercial Scale
Muñoz Considers Him A Friend Of Puerto Rico. Reaction in the Capital By John L. Cutter WASHINGTON, Nov. 11.-(PU)-Oscar L. Chapman, of Colorado, an original New Progressive Democrat, was today named Secretary of the Interior to replace Julius A. Krug. The White House announced that the change will take place on Dec. 1, when Krug's resignation, hastily submitted yesterday, becomes effective. Chapman, 52 afto" old, h""ldo Under Secretary of ¡o Interior since afto 1946. And he has been with the Department since the late President Roosevelt appointed him Assistant to the Secretary of the Interior in 1933, at the beginning of the "New Deal" administration. Even before that, Chapman was known in Denver, where he practiced law, as an ardent Democrat and a liberal politician. He campaigned vigorously for President Truman in the "dark days" of the 1948 election battle, and his elevation to a cabinet post came exactly one year later. No Explanation of Reason" Krug gave no explanation for his
U. S. Steel Signs Agreement With Laborers
All Its Workers Will Return to Work. United Steelworkers and the United Steel Corporation, the largest steel mill in the United States, signed an agreement tonight settling the strike for good. I do definitively settling the strike of the company's 170,000 workers. The agreement constituted the final blow to the great strike in the steel industry. The companies which still insist on not bargaining with the Union are likely to follow U. S. Steel in settling the insurance and pension dispute. The agreement with United States Steel was announced one day after the resumption of negotiations between the company and the Union, and was a great relief to all those affected by the strike in the steel industry. Inland Steel officials continued to meet with union officials at another meeting. Union officials in another conference room at the Wil. (Ham Penn.) Hotel. A Union spokesman ( said q. the agreement with Inland will be announced "shortly." He said । that differences" in the wording ' of the agreement had been response(Continued on P. 14 Col, 6>
The Doctors Gave Him Back His Life
" 9 1 Balr \ M 1 ■' ' i''' " s , r is'" - "Al* 1 'X'ííilií" ■ . v 3 o, " " " } i v 11 if A - LdiibMf ' áM - tí, -Mr / Nurse Shirley Brain, of Par* Children's Hospital in Philadelphia, entertains little Carol McNally, nine mesea old, shortly before she is transferred to her home in this city. Carol, an "indigo child," was resuscitated by doctors after her heart had been inoperative for four minutes during an operation to correct the condition of her heart which prevented her from getting oxygen to her lungs. (Associated Press photo).
Chapman Interior Secretary; Praises Work of Muñoz and Piñero
" B OSCAR L, CHAPMAN resigns from the post which he speaks of," pledged since March 1946. Nor did he say what his plans were now. An Exchange of letters between Krug and President Truman, given publicity by the White House, did not shed light on the matter. The letters were friendly. Krug signed his own. "From you, sincerely. Cap." Mr. Truman addressed "u reply to "My dear (Continued on p. 14, col. 5).
Board Makes No Appropriations For Raises The Pergonal dp Office Will Have No Fund To Raise Jo* Salary* The Office of Person! will have no appropriation for the next affto for increase within! grade and reaslgnations of Government personnel. This is "sf because no recommendation to that effect has been made in the Seventh Economic Program, despite the recognition therein of the merits of an appropriation for such purposes. The rationale underlying the recommendation for such an appropriation has been set forth in the section on the Government's General Budget. The policy determined by the Board in its recommendations for the Seventh Program, which "appears in the preliminary program, is that no appropriations involving permanent increases in the budget should be made, except for the minimum necessary to operate new permanent improvements such as hospitals and schools. Low Cost of Living According to the recommendation that no such appropriation be made, the desire to grant the requested funds is minimized by the fact that the cost of living in the 1*1" has dropped about 9 percent in the last year. The Board adds that most economists, both in the United States and Puerto Rico, agree that the price level will decline in the next few years, thus allowing for an increase in the purchasing power of salaries. Nevertheless, an allocation of $325,000 is recommended for the scholarship plan" of the Office of Persona! for each of the program's afftos.
PONCE (By Miguel Rivera, Co-Respondent). - The seftor Luis A. Fe-1 rré, president of the Ponce Cement ■ Corporation; informed yesterday that it is not true that he is trying to com- 1 prarate the Government Cement Factory. Referring to a news item published to that effect in the Press, Zeftor Ferré said yesterday: "During my conference with the Governor, the matter of the purchase of the Government Cement Factory was not discussed at any time. This interview was limited solely to discussing the plans of Mayor Andres Grlllaaca. for the expansion of the Port of Ponce, in whose work I have cooperated as a private citizen, since I believe that in order to strengthen the economy of the city of Ponce and increase the income of this region, it would be necessary to establish a new governmental program for the expansion of the Port of Ponce, which I have been cooperating in my capacity as a private citizen.
But Adequate Standards Will Be Required German Drug To Be Used Soon As Aid To Streptomycin New YORK, Nov. 11 (PU)- The American Trudeau Society, medical section of the National Antituberculosis Association, has recommended the licensing of commercial firms for the production of BCG, the vaccine used as an immunizing agent against tuberculosis, as soon as adequate standards can be established for its production. Kirby S. Howell, M.D., chairman of the ATS, announced yesterday that a report of the Subcommittee on Immunology has been adopted which recommends "the continuation of efforts" to "refine and find suitable standards" for the production of BCG vaccine, and that when practicable, commercial firms be licensed under the National Institute of Health to produce the vaccine. (BCG. an abbreviation for bs- ( rilo Calmette-Guerln, comes from a non-virulent bak it of tuberculosis , hovin" and e" the most practical of the , known Immunlzatory agents ( against tuberculosis, according to Dr. Howell. It has been used extensively in Europe, he said, but its use in this country has been limited mostly to controlled studies because of the many unanswered questions surrounding the value of the vaccine. BCG is given only to persons who do not react to the tuberculous sensitivity skin test. E" Similar to 1* da 194* Except for the section relating to the issuance of licenses, 1* i jlerlaraclón of the ATS is essentially similar to 1" adopted in January 1948. Both statements inI say that "the degree of vaccine production is by no means complete; neither eg permanent" nor predictable U duration of relative Induced Immunity", and emphasize "the need for further basic research into the pro- ' blem" of artificial immunization ' against tuberculosis". 1 The revised statement also re-emphasizes that vaccination is one of many procedures to be used in the control of tuberculosis, and cannot be considered a substitute for approved hygienic measures or public health practices aimed at preventing or reducing tuberculosis infection and disease. The paragraph urging 1" adoption of standards as soon as possible, followed" by authorizations to commercial firms to produce BCG, is a substitute for a statement in 1" previous statement, which advised against making the vaccine available for 1" general distribution, primarily because the vaccine had never been subject" to uniform standards (standardartlzatlon). A more positive position has been taken in the current statement, calling for the adoption of uniform standards, so that it can be commercially pro- : duced in this area. J By Tani F. Eilia NEW YORK, Nov. 1L ¡ (PU)- A new drug developed by the" Germans will soon be put into use as an" "aid" to streptomycin in the treatment of tuberculosis in the" United States," reported h¿y two prominent" medical experts. The drug, a coal tar derivative known as Tibione, has been used extensively in Germany for about two years. About 7,000 people" have undergone" the treatment and German doctors are enthusiastic about the" results. As a result, Drs. Wahh McDermott, associate professor of medicine at Cornell University College of Medicine, New York, and Dr. H. Corwin Hinshaw, formerly of the Mayo Clinic and now in San Francisco, were in Germany during the year and performed a series of tests.
Ferré Denies Trying to Buy Government Cement Factory
The port facilities must be increased considerably. As to the sale of the Government cement factory, our position has always been clear and we have made it public on previous occasions. We are of the opinion that the sale of the Government's cement plant should not be made by negotiation but by public auction, with minimum conditions of acceptance which guarantee the right of all interested parties to compete freely, on the basis of a bid. "We believe that in this way we guarantee both the right of all interested parties and the opportunity of the Government to receive the highest price for the industries it sells."
Funds For Agencies Down
JP Recommends Only $5,255,000 Figure Is Five Million Less For Year '50-'51. Detail of Expenditures By S. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor, EL MUNDO The appropriations for public enterprises during the next fiscal year, 1950-51, will be reduced by more than five million dollars. These appropriations for the current fiscal year amounted to $10,834,399, while in the Seventh Economic Program prepared by the Planning Board, recommended appropriations for 1950-51 amount to only $5,255,000. The recommended appropriations for 1950-51 to the various public enterprises are as follows: To continue the aqueduct concession, $200,000 per year for the next five years. It is reported that since these are not of a self-liquidating nature, like the urban aqueduct, the General Fund subsidy is necessary for the project, and it is further indicated that the Aqueduct Authority's bond issue will provide for the construction and expansion of the necessary urban aqueducts, and that no General Fund contributions are needed for this purpose. Homes Program The recent Federal Homes Act will make it possible, in agreement with the Board of Directors, to carry out an extensive program without the need for contributions from island funds. As is known, the program for the next two years will be 9,000 units and it is expected that a total of approximately 29,000 units will be authorized in all years of the program. No funds are recommended for solar, in view of the scarce current resources and the large amount of federal funds to be used for the construction of homes and the development of urban areas. Fomento Industrie! In the Seventh Economic Program, $500,000 is included in the Industrial Development Fund for the Development Corporation to provide land and lots, or only lots, for the establishment of industrial plants. The Board believes that a problem has been the lack of suitable land for this, which has delayed the establishment of industry. For the non-recoverable research and guidance expenses of this enterprise, $400,000 per year is recommended. A recommendation is included for an allocation of $1,000,000 in 195051 for the rum advertising campaign, the Board being of the opinion that the effectiveness of this campaign has been demonstrated by the increase in retail sales of the Island's rum in certain states. The Board further recommends that $20,000 be reimbursed to the Compsftla de Fomento, since said sum was advanced for the realization of a census of manufactures in the Island. The organization of the (Continued on page 14, col. 7)