THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY i - Mostly partly cloudy, except that it will be cloudy with isolated showers and thundershowers during the afternoon and evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 87 degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., MAS inch* of mercury.
NEW YORK, Oct. 18. (PU). - This afternoon the* *1gulent* temperature* i New York, 59; Chicago, 56; Washington, 59; Miami, 87. Forecast* for* m*fl*n* in New York and neighboring cities*: fair weather. Maximum temperature: 65.
MARAÑA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Enterad as second class matter, Post Office, Ban Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 14, 1950
NUMBER 14170 FIVE CENTAVOS
Fournier's Widow Questioned
Went to Prosecutor's Office With Sylvia Barros
By Enrique Remíre* Bren Editor of El MUNDO At 4 P. M. yesterday, Mrs. Luz Liarla Sampedro, widow of Fournier, who was accompanied by Mrs. Sylvia Barros, first wife of Ramón Antonio Fournier Sampedro, arrived at the District Attorney's Office at 4 P. M., escorted by members of the Secret Police, to be extensively interrogated by District Attorney Angel Viera Martínez, who was accompanied by Mrs. Sylvia Barros, first wife of Ramón Antonio Fournier Sampedro. It is known that the latter, son of Mrs. Sampedro, is accused of first degree murder for the death of his ex-wife Mrs. Iris Nereida Hernandez Matos, with whom he remarried. Minutes after the beginning of the interrogation of the prosecutor Viera MarHlhez, he asked the representatives of the press to leave his office so that no part of the interrogation of the witnesses could be heard from his office. Trusted man Marcelino Lopez, whom we mentioned in one of our first reports on the case of Iris Nereida Hernandez Matos, was taken yesterday to the prosecutor's office. Lopez is the trusted name of the Fournier Funeral Home. He has been working with this firm for 23 years, and is a person of absolute confidence of the Fournier family. The witness, who has tenaciously declared that he knows nothing about the facts, gave the prosecutor Viera Martinez four notebooks. Marcelino López, with whom we exchanged a few words. He informed EL MUNDO that he helped Ramón Antonio Fournier in the embalming work. The notebooks among Radas are related to certain works of the embalming agency (Continued on pg. 16 Col. 4).
Electrification Plan Proposed In Rural Zone
BPP To Invest $6,000,000 Through Bond Issue - For 8. Gálves Mataran* EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Water Resources Authority submitted to the Planning Board a rural electrification program at a cost of six million dollars, to be carried out during the next four years. In submitting its programs in the administrative hearings for the Eighth Six-Year Economic Program, the Water Resources Authority included one for rural electrification to be carried out through a bond issue for that purpose and within a period of only four years. Bond issue According to Rafael Durand, head of the Finance and Economic Studies Division of the Planning Board, the bond issue will be carried out by placing it with the Rural Electrification Administration and the Government of Puerto Rico to guarantee any deficiency in the system's revenues. The plan tends to offer greater guarantees to the Investors because it is a program that does not entail any profit for the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority and it is difficult to cover its cost, at the beginning. The Government of Puerto Rico, Mr. Durand said, would be responsible for any failure of the funds to cover the bonds' commitments. BPP Margin Would Be Recorded In addition, it was explained that the issuance of bonds to carry out the program would not record the Island Government's borrowing margin, but rather that of the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority, and would not affect the development of the other plans being carried out by the Authority. The plan is being considered by the Joint Plans Board to determine whether or not it should be included in the Eighth Economic Program. The Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority also included in its recommendations an accelerated plan for the project in southwestern Puerto Rico, known as Valle de Lijas. This project, as is well known, aims to fully utilize the water for irrigation, electric power and urban supplies. It was explained that it is necessary to accelerate the project due to the urgent need to rehabilitate and cultivate the lands of the Lajas Valley, of potential agricultural value; the urgency of supplying potable water to many of the populations of the southwest of the Island; the continuous growth of the demand for electric energy of the Insular system and the desire to regulate and avoid devastating floods of the Loco, Añasco and lower Yaueo rivers. The administrative views contl(Contlnued on pg. 18 Col. 3)
The agency officials reported yesterday that a person by the name of William Troche, who also used the names Harry Chas. Goldsburg and John Bedford, approached an undisclosed person in Puerto Rico proposing that if he would send him 50 birth certificates of as many Puerto Rican workers, he could get them advantageous job opportunities in California. The agency reported that the certificates were delivered by said number of workers and sent to the following address: William Troche, P. O. Box 531, West Norland, California. In his communications to the person with whom he was in contact in Puerto Rico, Troche signed himself as such and by the other names mentioned above. In these communications she informed that the workers could be employed in agricultural work in California receiving salaries up to 12 dollars a day picking fruit and cotton. He said that he would send for the workers, after he had the authorization of the federal Department of Labor, and pay their fares. He promised to be on the island to finalize the details of the transfer of the workers in August of next year, but in that month he wrote again to Puerto Rico informing that he would not be able to come until August of next year. Some of the workers who sent in their birth certificates then suspected a scam - they reported the case to the Immigration and Naturalization Service in San Juan. That agency referred the case to its regional offices in Miami, Florida, and officials there (Continued on pg. 16 Col, 3)
By ROBERT BRANSON SAIGON, French Indochina, Oct. 13. (PU)- The French today ordered the evacuation of Thatkhe, a stony citadel on the border with Communist China, in the face of mounting pressure from Communist Viet Mlnh forces in Indochina. Advances from the Thatkhe garrison have made it safely to Nacham, another border fortress 27 miles to the south, a spokesman for French headquarters here said. The bulk of the French forces are still making their way along the undulating mountain roads between Thatkhe and Nacham, and are in danger of being attacked at any moment by the
JI ■ - fl í ■ fl S B fl - JSRr 588888888 I I B fl B fl B IB ■ "fl Ta Mrs. Lus Sampedre Vda. de Fournier (front), followed by Mrs. Sylvia Bsrros, ex-wife of Ramon Antonio Fournier, and police sergeant Laura Ssn Antonio, arrives at the San Juan prosecutor's office for* questioning by the prosecutor. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Apparent Birth Certificate Fraud Discovered
Immigration Service Claims Individual Was Requesting Them From California To Puerto Rico. - He Was Arrested
By Luis Sánchez Cappa, El. MUNDO The San Juan office of the Immigration and Naturalization Service reported yesterday that it has discovered an apparent fraud of Puerto Rican "worker" birth certificates by an unidentified person.
. Perez Says Only Asylum And Sanatorium Works Will Be Completed With Sum The Health Department's Office of Hospital Census, Stftor Julio A. Perez, reported yesterday that the 50 percent reduction in the allocation for the hospital construction program made by the Bureau of the Budget affects the Health Department's hospital plan in a vital way. Mr. Pérez said that if the allocation remains at the two million and a half million, work will continue on the Manicomio, the Psychiatric Hospital in Ponce and the central facilities of the Anti-Tuberculosis Hospital in Rio Piedras. He also said that some other Health Center would also have to be finished, but that other important projects, whose development depended on the federal allocation, would have to be postponed. Reconsideration Requested Explaining the reduction of the $150,000,000 provided for the construction of hospitals nationwide, the Chief of the Hospital Census Bureau said that on the matter the American Hospital Association, whose recent meeting in Atlanta he attended, passed a "(Continued on Page 16, Col. 1)
French Ordered to Evacuate Thatkhe Fort in Indo-China
enemy forces, which have overwhelming numerical superiority. The French spokesman would not say whether the troops are under fire, but the general opinion is that if they are not, they are about to be. Most Dangerous Site The spokesman described the withdrawal as "urgent and delicate**. He added that the most dangerous site for the column* is the Lungval Pass, halfway across. The communists have between 25,000 and 35,000 troops in the sector. Thatkhe has been the seventh border fort abandoned by the French since September 18, when the men of Communist leader Ho Chl Mlnh, equipped with new weapons in Communist China (Continued on 1* page 16 Col. 2).
4 Municipalities Launch Clean-Up Plan
Lions Sponsor New Campaign San Juan, Rio Piedras, Bayamón and Corozal Mayors Meet By Benjamin SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer Four municipalities - San Juan, Rio Piedras, Bayamón and Corozal - will undertake an extensive and intense campaign of cleaning and beautification of the locality in general. The campaign is sponsored by the Lions of the Leonlstlca Zone comprising these municipalities, under the direction of Dr. Antonio A. Rodríguez Géigel, president of the San Juan Club and vice-governor of the Zone. During a meeting held yesterday by the mayors and Iconistic leaders of the mentioned towns, the different phases of the projected campaign were discussed in general terms. It was alleged that one of the great difficulties faced by the mayors in their cleaning services is the lack of cooperation from the public, the Police and the Health Inspectors. Vice Governor Rodríguez Géigel, who presided over the meeting held at Bird's Restaurant, explained the problem. Angeles Méndez de López, acting mayor of Río Piedras, said that since she took charge of the municipal administration in the University City, her "main concern" has been the cleanliness and beautification of the city. She informed that the Executive Council and the Governor have already approved a loan of $100,000 for the purchase of six large trucks, 15 medium ones and small rivers, to be used for the cleaning and beautification of the city. 15 medium trucks and small rivers for cleaning services. At present they have 15 old vehicles, war surplus, caí i completely unserviceable* - Inadequate* for the work of cleaning the city. He complained that the public does not cooperate in keeping the city clean and that the police do not seem very interested in enforcing the municipal ordinances regarding cleanliness. Bayamón Mayor Ramón Espinosa spoke for Bayamón, who insisted that an intense educational campaign must be carried out to achieve greater cooperation from the public. He called attention to the fact that it is not only the public in the suburbs* that is indolent to the problem, but that those in the urban area also seem indifferent* to the situation. He also alleged lack of cooperation from the Island Government, accusing the Police and Health Inspectors of negligence in the enforcement of the ordinances. He further alleged that the police service in Bayamón is so insufficient that there is often only one police officer serving a city of 50,000 inhabitants. He said that his municipality invests $25,000 to $30,000 in cleaning services* annually, He suggested that the sectors of citizen* indifference to the problem be published. Pedro A. Miranda, representing Mayor Felisa Rincón de Gautier, spoke for San Juan. He assured that the Municipality (Continued on page 16 Col., 1)
Photograph of Shaw, Censored By The I HL' w Bfll BF Kkllx fl B ■ JlB ■k/fl This m the first intrat of Georg* Bernard Shaw* - aeleoethoned by himself - after his release from the hospital where he was confined as a result of a fractured femur. Shaw, who is now M years old, posed for two portraits and instructed the photographer to photograph him only from the men's side up. He posed facing the Garden where he suffered the West, at his residence at Ayot St Lawrance, in Herfordshire, England. (Associated Press photo).
Vishinskv Amendment Attempts to Eliminate Forces for U.N.
LAKE SUCCESS, New York, Oct. 13 - (PU) - The Russian delegate * to the United Nations General Assembly, Andrel Vl*hin*ky, attempted to weaken the American proposal to strengthen the General Assembly against aggressors in the event of the Security Council's inability to act because of the veto by submitting an amendment to annul, among other things, all reference to the allocation of national defense forces for use by the United Nations against aggressors. The Vlshlnsky amendment proposes twelve overrides in the U.S. proposal, but it is doubtful whether the Political Committee will agree to them. One of them is 1* of six paragraphs relating to the allocation of national "force" for the
the allocation of national forces for international use by the United Nation. It deletes all reference to the establishment of a "Commission on Collective Measures" to study the methods, "Including armed force'' which the United Nations might use to keep the peace. 'It also seeks the deletion of reference to the agreement taken by the Assembly last year reiterating the "essential steps of peace" and also deletes reference to the duty of the "big five" members of the Security Council to "exercise with restraint the use of ! veto." Patrol De Pa* Vishlnsky's amendment leaves(Contlnued on p. 16 Col. 6)
Kumchon Captured Catching 8,000 Reds - - - ' - - - - - - - - - -4. -
Attention given to Sending Funds to Municipalities
The Treasury Department expects that by the end of next year at the latest, all the municipalities will receive the check of the fund liquidations corresponding to last August. A delay in sending this liquidation to the Municipality of Rio Piedras, as is known, caused a bitter incident between Mayor Angeles M. de López and a group of laborers who worked on the repair of the city's streets. These workers demanded to be paid their "wages for work done during two months, and the Municipality could not pay them, according to "e Informó, because it had not received the liquidation for the month of August that the Treasurer of Puerto Rico should have sent them. Signed Voucher* The Subte "orero, Mr. Francisco de Jesús Toro. He informed that the payment vouchers for these liquidations for all the municipalities were signed yesterday afternoon. He added that he proposed to immediately request the cooperation of the Island Auditor, so that these vouchers would be processed as soon as possible and the checks could be received by the municipalities no later than the end of next week. Mr. De Jesús Toro informed that the municipality of Rio Piedras is due a liquidation amounting to $90,210, which is broken down as follows: oMinarlo* fund, $59,330; special street conservation fund, $19,578; and Municipal Hospital fund, $11,304. The Deputy Treasurer explained that the delay this year in making the liquidations of funds *to the municipalities* for the month of August *is due to the reorganization carried out in the Treasury Department. He said that as a result of this reorganization, some changes* were made in the official collection forms, with the purpose of facilitating the work of the Internal Revenue collectors and simplifying the work of tabulation and mechanical computation of the Revenues in the* central offices of the Department (Continued on page 16 Col. 8).
-He landed at Hyk-'í man Airport at 7:46 a.m. (1:46 ' p.m. Eastern time), after a transpacific flight from San Francisco. The President and "u small armada of three* planes, carrying top advisers and diplomats, and the Press, were supposed to leave here at midnight (6 a.m. "ábado Puerto Rican time) for their first meeting with MacArthur "at some point beyond the International timeline" tomorrow. The exact "itlo of Ja historic appointment between the U.S. Commander-in-Chief" and the General who is leading the "United Nations forces in Korea has not been disclosed. Some sources said it will take place at Wake, others said at Midway. Short Conference Wherever it is held, the conference will be short-possibly a few hours. Mr. Truman is supposed ■p to return to Hickman Airport tomorrow night, to rest until Monday morning and draft the speech he will deliver Tuesday in San Francisco. The sky was clear and the day hot when the Chief Executive stepped off the plane, which arrived 15 minutes later than the Con "tellatlon Gota de Roclo, carrying General Omar N. Bradley, Chairman of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, and other officers. Mr. Truman looked rested after the long trip across the Pacific, although he forgot about the two hours lost between California and Hawaii, and got up earlier than he had planned. He thought it was five A. M., but it was only 3:00 A. M. when he got off the boat. M. when he climbed out of his comfortable bunk. The Governor of Hawaii, Ingram M. Stalnback; the Mayor of Honolulu, John Wil "on; and the delegate to the Congreao, Joaeph R. Farrington, greeted "1 President. Stalnback greeted him with a yellow "leí" which he tried to put alre(Contlnued on p. 16 Col. 4)
CARLOS P. ROMULO TO COME TO ISLAND NEW YORK, Oct. 18. (PU)-The Foreign Minister of the* Philippines, Carlos P. Romulo, di- , Jo today that he has accepted an invitation to speak at Rio de Janeiro on Oct. 24 and at Sao Paulo on the 25th, "on the* United Nations. The former president of the General Assembly leaves New York on the 22nd and during the brief stop in San Juan, Puerto Rico, will present 1* United Nations flag to Puerto Rican authorities. Regrasn * New York on the 26th.
President Truman Is Already in Hatvaii
'?_' 1- V K" '\*7 *: /f < ' ¿ W . MF\ _ _ I
President Truman is seen off by Secretary of State Dean Acheson (right) at Washington National Airport as he was about to leave for St. Louis, the first stop on his trip to the Pacific, to confer with General Douglas MacArthur. (Associated Press photo.)
Believe Your First Meeting With MacArthur Will Be Very Short
Conference Point Still Ignored. Chief of State To Report. Tuesday in San Francisco
By Merriman SMITH PEARL HARBOR, Hawaii, Oct. 13 (PU)-President Truman arrived today on the third leg of a flight that will culminate in a dramatic conference with General Douglas MacArthur. The White House, Mr. Truman's flight, - the DC-6 Independence
A ' ' ' J Alarms Ponce Wave of Robberies, Escalations Fugitive from Justice Escapes a Group of 25 Island Agents October 13 (By Miguel Rivera, correspondent) - This city is alarmed and very worried by the wave of robberies and escalations of which it has been the victim for the last week. The latest misdeed occurred in the early hours of this morning in the Chapel of San Conrado, in the Mariani neighborhood, from where the thieves took fifteen dollars in cash, destroyed part of the religious property kept there and left everything in complete disorder. In addition, last night there was an encounter between a fugitive from justice from Ponce and a prison guard, who was disarmed and shot, after a fierce melee. It is believed that the latest robberies and burglaries that have occurred in this city this week are the work of a gang of four or five criminals. Susano Martinez is a fugitive who escaped from the Ponce District Jail on Saturday, along with Mariano Garde Acevedo, who have a sentence pending on appeal for first-degree burglary. Both are 19 years old. Garcia Acevedo was arrested the same Saturday and returned to jail. He manages to sneak away i Last night at about ten o'clock the prison guard Pedro Gordils Santos surprised the fugitive Susano Martinez in the Machuelo neighborhood and when he went to arrest him, "he was forced to fight with him, body to body >. The fugitive succeeded in snatching the regulation gun with (Continued on page 16 Col. 6)
Naval Bombardment Still Near Russia
Final Invasion or Onslaught Toward Pyongyang Seems Imminent By Ralph Teataorth TOKYO, "Saturday, Oct. 14 (FU). -The United Nations ships and aircraft have launched a fierce coordinated attack on North Korean supply lines within a few miles of Russia and Communist China, and it is indicated that the final blow is imminent. In the ground operations, men of the U.S. 1st Cavalry, supported by British and South Korean troops, laid a trap against some eight to ten thousand North Koreans in the encircling campaign against the communist capital of Pyongyang. Cavalrymen" stormed into Kumchon, 70 miles southeast of Pyongyang, virtually completing the encirclement of all enemy forces in the sector. South Korean" troops, advancing toward Pyongyang from the east, advanced another 10 miles" westward, landing on the" outskirts of Majon-NI, 74 miles east of the capital. Near Rurais Led by the glorious battleship Mliurf, warships and aircraft operating from aircraft carriers attacked a 275-mile stretch of the east coast, where the enemy's main supply route is located, from the large base route of Vladivostok. This "attack" came at a point 49 miles from the Soviet border. Air Force aircraft attacked the main supply route from Manchuria, bombing a point 15 miles from the border. Another" aircraft" attacked the" railroad prlnclpale" north and south of Pyongyang. The pattern and intensity of the Allied air strikes raised the possibility that the North Korean communications system had been paralyzed, and that the field was open for a new and deadly amphibious landing operation by General Douglas MacArthur's forces. Such an operation at this time would add color to the already dramatic meeting between President Truman and General Douglas MacArthur, scheduled for this weekend at some point in the Pacific. At the time President Truman landed in Honolulu, United Nations forces were attacking the North Africans by land, sea and air with increasing intensity and MacArthur probably had seven U.S. Infantry, Marine and Parachute divisions in reserve ready to launch at a moment's notice. The battleship Mlsurl, which led the Allied bombardment of the east coast, sailed south to attack the railroad center* and bridges in the Tanchon sector. Tanchon is 100 miles south of Chongjln, the railroad and industrial center - only 49 miles from Russia - which the big Mlsurl and the American, Canadian, British and Australian cruisers, destroyers and planes had attacked the day before. The Mlsuri was withdrawn from the Chongjln area because all the target-worthy 16-inch guns had been pulverized. However, other warships continued to bombard Chongjln and the surrounding area. Naval planes, in a raid along a 275-mile strip" from Chongjln to Wonsan, sank 30 Communist ships. Air Bombardment B-29 superfortresses were used in the major attack on the North Korean oilfield. One superfortress force bombed the Namsl-Dong railroad center, only 15 miles from the Manchurian border, concentrating mostly on the railroad tunnel and the main road. Other "uperforts" attacked the main road connecting Pyongyang with Ru "la and Manchuria. These attacks covered a swath of about 85 miles from Sarlwon, 33 miles south of Pyongyang, to Kunl-RI, 48 miles north. 48 miles north. B-28 light bombers also attacked the sector between Sarlwon and Pyongyang, and U.S. and Australian fighters pounded targets of all types on the battle fronts, the First Cavalry took aim at the area between Sarlwon and Pyongyang.