THE N®NDO
NEW YOBK. Nov. 17. (FU)- The following temperatures were recorded this afternoon: New York, M; Chicago, 48; Washington, 48; Miami, 78: Weather generally sunny and .eártinaadamoSrte freoeo. Highest temperature oerea of lee M gradee. , '
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY" - Partly cloudy in the morning, becoming cloudy with scattered showers and some thunder in the afternoon. Partly cloudy in the evening. IN SAN JOAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 80 degrees; low. 70 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 8941 inches of mercury. * _
pnnvtER DAILY IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION
ANNUALS XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office. San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 1950
NUMBER 14205 FIVE CENTAVOS
Questioned Who Tried to Torch Bronx Post Office
■ ' 5 : lá á Cí iiKfíWO ¿ * ■ " * * ■ í- nr* -■ -
\ Postal Inspector G. B. Forster (right) questioned "Jose Blvera Colon, 87, a Puerto Rican nationalist who was arrested after he tried to set fire to a post office in the Bronx, New York. Police said Rivera Colon said he tried to set fire to the post office to call attention to the horrible
to call attention to the horrible conditions in Puerto Rico. On the table is the ' package of newspapers soaked in gasoline that ' Colón Rivera placed at the entrance of the post office and the can of gasoline that was taken from him. (Photo by P. A.)
Oscar Collazo Pleaded Not Guilty.
I ■■■ '■ - " - 1 Minister Cuba Denies Version About Prío Barred© Calls Ridiculous Claim Related to Colombia Meeting BOGOTA, November 17. - (PU) - A ministre of Cuba, Jmó Barredo Síglon eaHfled as "lying and ridiculous* the claim that the President of Cuba, Carlos Frío Socarráa has "purposes or plans to Intervene in loa affairs or problems Interiors of the brother palios." / , - The minister 'said quo the affirmation "os aviesamente mentirosa and ridiculous and tongo full trust in the eapaclded of the peoples of the American continent, identified in the supreme domocrár tica aspiration for the libró game of rights and freedoms that cabrón qualify ■ morondamente so mendacious or in' solantes pronouncements." Publica Negativa * Barrado Sigler arrived yesterday in Bogota and today published in El Siglo a statement denying the allegation that appeared yesterday in the same newspaper that included the suspicion that Soconras and the Guatemalan President and the former President of Costa Rica were related to the attacks against other presidents amorica- . Jaime Posado, Colombian delegate to the Havana Democracy Conference, requested an investigation of the charges in a memorial addressed to the Minister of the Interior, Domingo Sarasty, and to the Chancellor Gonzalo Restrepo Jaramillo. Political Transcendence Posado emphasizes the political transcendence acquired at this time by El Siglo and ardently refutes the charges or insinuations about the American International revolutionary plan, interpreting. (Continued on page 16, Col. 2)
* Coffelt Said He And Torresola Were Going To Assassinate Truman By JAMES F. DONOVAN WASHINGTON, Nov. 17. (PU)-Oscar Collazo, the Puerto Rican nationalist who tried to assassinate President Truman, pleaded not guilty today to charges of first-degree murder. - I plead not guilty, Your Honor," he told federal Judge Henry A. Schwolnhaut. Those were the only words he uttered during his appearance before the packed courtroom. He spoke when asked about his plea to 1st counts of first-degree murder, murder in the commission of a felony and two attempts on his life. The mild-mannered nationalist was dressed in a brown suit, blue tie and white shirt. As the indictments were handed down, he stood still with his hands folded behind his back. Sturdy federal marshals stood guard beside him and watched for onlookers. Collazo confessed that he and Grliollo Torresola, a nationalist killed during a shootout at the presidential mansion, had tried to invade the Blalr House to kill President Truman. But he pleaded not guilty to the murder charge related to the death of White House guard Leslie Coffelt. Tradldonalmqnte the courts refuse to* accept a guilty plea in any first-degree murder case. Schwolnhaut did not set a trial date after Leo A. Rover, the court-appointed public defender, passionately requested that Collazo not be tried on Dec. 16, as the court clerk had indicated. "It would be a retrograde step in the American way of life to force this man to submit to a trial in mid-December, after the defense attorneys have said that he will not be tried on that date.
Saltari Crespo Was Booked At La Princesa Also For Law 53 Rufino Rolon Accused. Cite One of, Dorado Domingo Saltari Crespo, who a voice stunned against the life of the late Commissioner do Puerto Rico in Wáshlngton, Santiago Igle-" olas Pantln, Entered the San Juan District Jail last night. Before entering the jail, charged with attempting to overthrow the government by force. Jump! Creípo said: "Stalin's tyranny was a miniature compared to what Puerto Rico is suffering at this moment. I," he added, "am innocent. I have been accused of infringement of Law 53 of 1948, which punishes revolts, and I can attest with the President of the Popular Committee of the Buenos Aires neighborhood of Santurce, that I have not been involved in any subversive movement. What a tyranny we are suffering, boys! How the Americans will laugh at us. He regrets that there have been so few casualties. How the Americans will laugh at us, because we Puerto Ricans are fighting with each other. Then he requested permission from the agents "to give me a stick of rum". -I already want you to kick us out of the police," replied an undercover agent, while he led the accused to prison, without stopping, Rolón Marrero Also the Special Prosecutor General, Josó C. Aponte, accused Rolón Marrero. Aponte, charged Rufino Rolón Marrero with violation of Law 53 of 1948, with bail of 825,000. Rolón Marrero was arrested at his farm in the Candelaria neighborhood of Vega Alta, yesterday morning* after the most advisable measures were taken to arrest him, by agents of the Internal Security Bureau of the Police. Rolón Marrero and Saltari Crespo were the only nationalists who <Continued on pAma *6, Col. 3)
Truck Collapses Bridge One Worker Dies in Accident One Kilometer from Carolina.
* By 5. Gi/ver Maturana Editor of EL MUNDO The excessive weight of a trailer loaded with a 40-ton load caused the collapse of the bridge on the Carolina-Canovanas highway yesterday morning. The accident occurred at approximately 2:00 a.m., when a trailer truck driven by driver Lula Gonsálos tried to pass the bridge, giving way to the bridge's structure, a crane of the firm* Rivera y Rexach, with a 40-ton load, according to Interior Commissioner Jorge Jimónos, who was late yesterday at the accident site directing the works for the preparation of a provisional crossing. "Caution recommended Commissioner Jimónos said that when he granted permission to the driver, Luis Gonsálos, to cross the trailer with the crane over the bridge, he advised him not to pass, due to the excessive weight of the vehicle and its load.
with its load. However, he granted permission, informing him that on other occasions the vehicle had crossed the bridge without any consequences. Ramón Arsón died in the accident, who was riding on the crane, on top of the trailer, directing the maneuver of the vehicle in its rear delivery. - The driver, Lula Gonsálos, was unhurt in the accident. According to Commissioner Jiménos, the road will be interrupted by the monkeys until Monday. - The firm Rivera and Rexach, owners of the crane, is trying to establish a provisional crossing by filling in the torrone adjacent to the left side of the bridge. For this work, the firm has a brigade of workers operating a gravel dump a few meters from the site of the accident. A crowd of curious onlookers is blocking the road between Carolina and Jugar where the bridge is located (Continued on page 16, Col. 6).
65th Regiment Closes the Route Along Which Red Troops Were Fleeing
Fernos Spent Half Hour With Truman Says He Remains As Good Friend Of Island As Before Attack -_i % By James F. Cunlnngham WASHINGTON, Nov. 17. - (PU) - President Truman remains as good a friend of Puerto Rico as he was before the Nationalists tried to assassinate him, said Resident Commissioner A. Fernos Isonn, based in Washington. Fernos Isonn, on the basis of his visit to the White House today. "I am pleased to know that the President is as good a friend as he has always been," said Dr. Fernos Isernn. - Dr. Fernós Isern said. - "And he has been a very good friend." Fernós reported that the President expressed his warm Rancla" to the people and the Legislature of Puerto Rico for their "resolution of rejoicing" on November B, for having saved the Chief Executive. Asked how the nationalist situation is now on the island, Fernós told reporters, "Everything is calm." Fernós said that the mainland press and the ed?torlallistas, in particular, had been very sympathetic about the nationalist disturbances on the Island and on the Continent. The Puerto Rican jibaro will only resort to violence "to defend and reserve" the American freedom and democracy in which he believes, Dr. Antonio Fernos Isern said today at the White House. Coming out of his thirty-minute talk with President Truman, the Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington declared that "Puerto Rican nationalist lunatics are trying to gain illegitimate power over a people who do not want to give them that power. Island Response The 63rd Puerto Rican Regiment (Continued on 16 Col. 5) Borinqueneers Suffer More Casualties Army Authorized Yesterday A New List of 10 The Army Public Relations Office reported yesterday the following Puerto Rican casualties in Korea: 1 Master Sgt. Dionisio Martinez. belonging to Company E of the 65th. Killed in action on October 17. His wife. Ramona Dleppa, resides at 12 Padlal St., Caguas. Private Rodolfo Barrios, belonging to Company G of the 65th. Seriously wounded on September 23. Potra Sánchez, mother of this soldier, resides at 53 Pedro Vargas St. in Guánlca. Private first class José Flores Delgado, belonging to Company E of the 65th. Wounded seriously without informing the date of death. His wife. Luz A. Alvarez, resides at 4 Rafael Malml Street, in Caguas. More Soldiers Private first class, Clnso Gulllrmo Rosa Rivera. Disappeared in (Continued on page 16, Col. 1)
-A fleet of SO superfortalesaR B-29s, slow 40,000 bombs Incendiarlas over Hocryong (A), rail center carea the Manchurian border, on 15 November. At the eastern end of the battle line (B), a battalion of Puerto Ricans attached to the American Third Division, advanced eight miles yesterday, cooperating with other Allied troops in
D. Angel Ramos Sponsors Journalism Scholarship Returns SI,000 Moors Cabot Award to Columbia NBPÉMfORK, Nov. 17 (P. U.)~ A Puerto Rican student will be able to attend Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism during the 1951-52 academic year, with the new scholarship established by Don Angel Ramos, publisher of EL MUNDO, San Juan, Puerto Rico, it was announced today. Dean Carl W. Ackerman of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism announced that Mr. Ramos has returned to the University the 81,000 award he received last month at the annual Miírla Moors Cabot Convocation, and that the money will be used to establish a new scholarship, to be awarded only to a Puerto Rican student who meets the requirements for admission to the School of Journalism for the 1951-52 academic year. The dean said he had discussed the matter of the scholarship with Don Angel Ramos last month and more recently, with Dr. Jaime Benitez, rector of the University of Puerto Rico. * This is the first scholarship exclusively for a Puerto Rican in the history of our faculty," said Dean Ackerman, "We are grateful to Mr. Ramos not only for the scholarship but for the high ideal he has of providing journalism education to a Puerto Rican citizen who will return to Puerto Rico," he said.
who recently escaped from the prison. The doctors of that penal institution have taken the necessary measures, having isolated the sick, who are receiving aureomlclna treatment, without any death having been reported to date. The Wall's disease has been recorded, on the other hand, with greater intensity in the metropolitan area in recent months. More than twelve cases have been registered, one of which died, as well as sporadic cases have been registered in the island. Recently Dr. O. Lopez S acheco, well-known veterinarian of io; Piedras, informed that he has treated several dogs in his clinic, the cusios suffered from Well's disease, which is also known as hemorrhagic jaundice, although the cases registered in human beings, it has been informed that they have been produced by a loptosplra produced by contaminated mice. They had no information The Health Department did not have official information about the cases of Well's disease that occurred in the Presidio. On Thursday afternoon, a commission composed of the Chief of the Epidemiology Bureau, Dr. Abel de Juan, the Deputy Chief of the Public Health Department, Dr. Rafael Tlmothée and Dr. Janer, of the Public Health Unit of Rio Piedras, visited the Presidio. In said penal institution, the di(Continued on page 16, Col. 2)
-'¿"W UTSwifori Ir f f A /CT£HMnchMn : j p 1 itíaisF c PTre ■ ° ír 9 K (S"" 0' ' jVísC" KOREA . Wcntsn '' ch,n". m í 1° - " * ' ' c
The North Koreans were working to close a gap through which the North Koreans were infiltrating to the south. Ixm rtaoo attacked on November 15 east of Tokchon (C) in central North Korea in an apparent attempt to break through the Allied battle line. The broken line marks approximately the current battle front (Associated Press photo).
21 Prison Inmates Suffering From Weil's Disease Are Islán . -------- All of Them Among Those Who Escaped Health Department Investigates Epidemic Outbreak By Lulo Hernandez Aquino Rodaotor do EL MUNDO The Health Department has reported an epidemic outbreak of Weil's disease in the Island Precinct, where 21 of the inmates are suffering from the disease, in/armead. Mae*dMMMBSKte of the loa
Senate Requests Number Arms Inscribed Here Make Request to Roig/s Include Figueres Statements in the Minutes The statements of . Mr. Jose Figueres, former president of Costa Rica, published in the newspaper La Republica, were Included in the Senate minutes at the request of the spokesman of the majority, Victor Gutierrez Franqul, in yesterday's session. Mr. Figueres, in the published article, calls the attention of Latin America to "the swindle that the figure of Albtzu Campos is in this hemisphere", due to the existing lack of knowledge regarding the political truth of the people of Puerto Rico. It was agreed to send him a message of gratitude for his phrases and the clear way in which he exposed the case of Puerto Rico in his article. Informo. On Arms Senator Lionel Fernandez Mendez requested the Senate to ask Colonel Rolg for a list of the number of arms registered in Puerto Rico, and if possible, their (Continued on page 16, CnL 4)
In the maltona da ayar to the bridge that is to! the exit of Carolina hada Candvanos collapsed with the weight of a dragging truck that loaded a crane do 40 tons do poso. In the photograph on the left we see how the bridge came off the road at one end, leaving the truck and the crane crawler on the river bed, while the crane prop rests on the road, on the right we see a side view of the accident scene. Note how the steel frame of the bridge bent to rest on the riverbed. The driver of the vehicle, Luis Gonxóloz, was unhurt, but the man on the crane directing the maneuvers, Ramón Arxón, was killed in the accident. According to the mayor of Carolina, it had only been two weeks since DW*mentó de lo Interior had repaired this bridge (Photographs by EL MUNDO, oor Benjamín Morales).
UN Forces Liaison Strengthened Thus Boricuae UN Forces Advance Eight Miles West From Habongsani By WILUAM BUBSON WITH THE TENTH ARMY CORPS, Nov. 17 (PU)- United Nations units moved across the narrowest tip of North Coros to close a corridor through which Chinese and North Korean troops have been infiltrating. The battalion of Puerto Rican troops of the U.S. Third Division advanced eight miles westward from Habongsanni to the easternmost end of the sector, controlled by the Eighth South Korean Division. - . - This move strengthened the link between the United Nations armies in the east and in the center of the line - defended by Turkish and Filipino troops - and closed the route used by the Red troops who had been infiltrating behind the lines to regrouping centers south of Yangdok. Meanwhile a regiment of the 2nd U.S. Division sent a battalion to Songchon to attack the Reds who were reported to be massing in the Taksan Mountains. Intelligence Service reports indicate that the Communists were planning to muster two thousand men in the sector, but a spokesman for the Ninth Corps said that it is impossible to determine the number of Reds who have succeeded in crossing the United Nations lines, which may range from several thousand to several hundred. . The sector where the Reds are supposed to regroup forms a triangle of about two hundred and fifty square miles in the Impenetrable Mountains. The Songchóñ area, thirty miles northeast of Pyongyang. The eastern corner is in the vicinity of Yangdok. United Nations patrols have not penetrated into the mountains, but a company of the Second Division went to Yangdok on Friday without encountering opposition. However, another patrol was met with heavy fire on Sakehon. Intelligence agents reported that the Chinese and North Koreans infiltrating the staging area followed a route starting at Hoongchon, 45 miles north of Yangdok, attacking Seoul * SEOUL, Nov. 17. Communist guerrillas have reorganized for a major offensive against Seoul, according to Interior Minister Chough Pong Ok, who said that the chief of the guerrillas is General Kim Chalk, former commander of the North Korean operations forces. Kim Chalk was the former chief of the Seoul occupation until the liberation. He added that until a few days ago the units left behind our lines were more or less individual groups, but that Kim has now reunited and reorganized them. Although the guerrillas' activities are quite extensive, they are concentrated in three main areas, the first in the Chorwon Mountains area, 100 kilometers north of Seoul, and the Chungchon-Kap-yong area, about 80 kilometers northeast of Seoul. -. The news that they were threatening to take the city of Cpungchon caused a police regiment to be sent out last night. The city is said to be quiet, but it is reported that a large number of the enemy are in the area, which is where the largest concentration of guerrillas is located and where General Kim is believed to have his headquarters. They include the 17th regiment of the South Korean army, which is the best, a police regiment of the Republic of Korea, parts of the North American 24th Division, composed of Puerto Ricans, and Filipino and Turkish regiments, are attacking the largest and most dangerous red concentration, 80 kilometers north of Seoul. Chough said that this powerful United Nations force will not find it difficult to spoil the "red plans" against Seoul. The second zone oe in the vicinity of Taojon, where leo winged villages and mountains still infested do communists and small convoys catán 81n custody on the road do Seoul. . The third area is the mountainous region of Chlrl, the southern coastal coastline and scene of some of the most disastrous North American defeats in the second half of the war, and always a stronghold of Red guerrillas and sympathizers. - Chough said that between the first of October and November 8 there were 434 encounters in the area between October 1 and November 8. November 8 there were 434 encounters in Corn del (Continued on p. 16 Col. 3)