THE HONDO
■■■■j , 1 1 " '■■"■- WEATHER FORECASTS bWEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Medium cloudy during the day and at night. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - Maximum temperature, M degrees; minimum, 75 gmdoa. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 80.08 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, July 14. (PU). - This afternoon the" following" temperatures were reported: New York, 78; Chicago, 75; Wáshlngton, 79; Miami, 87. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring" eludade, sunny and pleasant.
TOMORROW'S NEWSPAPER
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 15, 1950
NUMBER 14080
FIVE CENTS
Reds Manage to Infiltrate South of the Kum; Study Industrial and Labor Mobilization c
Justice and Resources Board Review Process to Follow
Food Rationing Will Not Occur U.S. Has Sufficient Supplies. Economic Control Still Undecided By Raymond H. WILSON WASHINGTON, July 14 (PU) - The Justice Department and the National Security Resources Board are studying the machinery of industrial and labor mobilization in the event that the Korean war requires the imposition of controls. At the same time Senators Robert A. Taft, Republican of Ohio, and Burnet R. Maybank, Democrat of South Carolina, said that the war situation does not justify mandated controls. But both suggested the desirability of adopting a voluntary system to guarantee sufficient supplies of steel to military manufacturers. Attorney General J. Howard MacGrath, after an hour-long meeting of the Cabinet, said today that the Justice Department is studying the procedures to be followed if the industry is to operate for war. Other agencies would determine the amount of civilian production to be eliminated for military production. If "a program of this nature is eventually adopted, it will probably mean fewer automobiles, television receivers and other consumer items. This would create for the Government the problem of price maintenance and black market chasing. Secretary of Labor Maurice J. Tobln said that the question of mobilizing human resources is under study by the National Security Resources Board. This step will probably involve the freezing of men in vital jobs, wage fixing and, finally, a universal law. 1,08 Cabinet members stressed that no decisions have yet been made. Defense Secretary Louts Johnson said that any announcement about the possibility of imposing economic controls would have to come from the President, Mr. Truman said Thursday that although economic controls are being considered, there is no need for food rationing. His statement was amplified by Agriculture Department officials, who "said the country has more food than it can consume. Both Taft and Maybank did not rule out the possibility of mandatory controls, should the situation worsen. - Taft said in a statement that Congress can avoid mandatories if it reduces non-military spending. He added that "we are in a long war, and there is a great danger of inflation." He also indicated that he could support higher taxes to pay for the war when Congress knows the cost of the fight. Maybank, chairman of the Committee (Continued on page 16, Col. 4) - - - - - - * - - - - - -.
■- ■- ■■■■"■■■■ -- New Federal Judge ■ ■ ■Kí ; i B .B ; *w.- J jdB Thomss H. Roberts, general counsel of I" War Claims Commission, was appointed July 11 by President Truman to succeed David Chives as Judge on the Federal District Court for Puerto Rico. Roberta's brother, Mayor Denla J. Roberta. of Providence, Rhode Island, is a candidate for the governorship of the state, (Photo from THE WORLD Bureau in Washington.) Belgrade Accuses Bulgarians of Shooting Note Charges Soldiers Crossing the Tronlera.- Infiltration Alleged BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, July 14. (PU) -- The government accused Bulgarian forces of crossing the Yugoslav border and firing on sentries. The accusation was made in an official note presented to the Bulgarian ' legation at a time when 1 the growing war of nerves between Yugoslavia and its Comlnform vednos, Bulgaria, Hungary and Rumania was escalating. i The note states that a Bulgarian soldier was killed by a Yugoslav centlne- ■ la at the moment when he was trying to throw a hand grenade. He adds that yesterday the Bulgarian forces on the border carried out "four armed provocations" and demands that "the Bulgarian government take urgent measures to prevent the repetition of such armed provocations. It alleges Infiltration , It also says that Bulgaria "da- । llberndamente has Infiltrated in Yu- , goeslavla small units and in- . divlduos of its army." B According to the note, the Bulgarian soldiers fired more than a hundred shots . aln the Yugoslavian sentries i answering fire. 3 Meanwhile, Hungary announced that all travel without é special permits is forbidden on the 16 ) (Continued on page 16, Col. 5)
A Total of 800 Men Will Go To Buchanan
100 of Quota To Be Selected Selective To Be Sent In First Eight Working Days Of August The local boards of the Puerto Rico Selective Service will send during the first eight working days of August a total of 800 men to the Buchanan military camp for examination. This was revealed yesterday by the Selective Service Headquarters, which added that the Army will choose from among these 800 men the 100 men who as a quota correspond to the island to supply for the first call-up of 20,000 men, requested by the Department of Defense. The Selective Service said the local boards will send an average of 100 men daily to Camp Buchanan until the 800 requested are completed. All these men are classified 1-A. that is, fit for military service. The examination of these men will determine the selection to be made. In addition, the Selective Service State Headquarters also reported that this morning Colonel José Enrique Colom, appointed by President Truman to the position of State Director of the Selective Service in Puerto Rico, will receive the powers of his office from the hands of Colonel Rafael Giménez de la Rosa. The small ceremony will be held at the Selective Service Director's office in San Juan. (Contlnued on page 16 Col. 5) National Guard On Alert Since yesterday afternoon the Puerto Rico National Guard has been on alert, awaiting Wáshlngton's order to mobilize all or part of its forces. José Ortlz Vázquez, National Guard Public Relations officer, said that the offices of Brigadier General Esteves' headquarters, as well as the offices of the 295th and 296th combat group headquarters, will be alert to this possible order from President Truman. These offices will reportedly be watching for such an order 24 hours a day, until further notice. The mobilization order would reportedly come from General Slbert's headquarters or from the offices of the Governor of Puerto Rico, who is the organization's Commander in Chief. However, the National Guard indicated that to date it has no official information that it will mobilize even part of its troops. i
Signatures Collected Against Use of the Atomic Bomb
Commanding American Infantry in Korea
■' V I Hk'. ■ ■ ■ B.MI■ E| Lt. Gen. Walton H. Walker assumed command of U.S. ground forces in Nur Korea, July 12. MacArthur's headquarters in Tokyo reported that Walker had eatablecldo a command staff adventured in North Korea. (Photo F. A.) Times Asserts That National Reserves Should Be Called In Newspaper Also Advocates Recruiting Dangerous Reserves Korea The New York Times yesterday published an editorial asserting that the time has come to call in the reserves and National Guard to provide the manpower needed to bring the Korean war to a swift and successful conclusion. The paper asserts that the situation in Korea is that of a child trying to fill a man's role: small American units are desperately fighting against time, while reinforcements sent from the United States and Japan are advancing to the front lines. The paper estimates that the soldiers fighting and dying in Korea are giving all they have in the face of a numerically superior enemy, but that it is questionable whether the Nation, as a whole, is doing all it can. U.S. forces in Korea, he adds, are obviously small to repel a well-planned and better-executed aggression: the power of the enemy and the weaknesses demonstrated by the U.S. have stunned the American people. "To hold our own in South Korea" - he goes on to say -- "we shall probably need three or four divisions: to drive the enemy to the 38th Parallel we shall possibly need six to eight divisions, with much more naval air support than we have now." Other Danger Points Korea, the paper explains, is only one danger point in the world picture: the United States is committed to preventing the Communist conquest of Formosa (without AUfi(Contlnued on page 16 Col. 5)
Battlefields in South Korea.
2 ■ffmM.m i? K j north 1 veMSffi&seouL#, INCHON BHrJW \\\ 1 kA'ÍA SUWON Hon 9w n"' U - t ?KUMCHON J A E G U CMfe? F :U""vo "eM-"- ....... Dispatches from the front, received on July 12, said that the Americans had been pushed from Chochlwon (1) to ponlcl** ne on the Ur side of the Kum River. The North Korean force at Chungju (2) was apparently preparing to advance toward Hamchang and Kumchon (open arrows). A Red column was reported to have crossed the Han River at Ochlrl (3), in an attempt to make a flank attack on the Nurkoroan" troop" that captured Tanyang (4) Re said that the South Koreans were making strong resistance south of Utchln (8), where the Invader" troops had massed for a coordinated advance toward Pohang. (Associated Press photo).
Judge Exonerates Group Taking Pro-Peace Signatures from Public Offense Before Ordered to File Complaint. - Poster Against the Use of Atomic Weapons Displayed By "M. NIEVES RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO Judge Victoriano M. Fernandez issued a resolution desisflendrt A case in which yesterday morning he had ordered to swear out complaints for an alleged violation of Municipal Ordinance No. 18. with the ... - ... - Manuel Arroyo Zepnenfeldt and
Six San Juan Area Murders Eli Twelve Days Set Record To Follow Trend. - Latest in Hato Rey By ENRIQUE RAMIREZ BRAU Editor of EL MUNDO In the first twelve days of this month of July, six murders have been committed in the district of the metropolitan area that corresponds to the prosecutor on duty, Rafael Padró Parés. This is a record of one murder every two days. If this upward curve continues, it will break all previously established records for (Continued on page 16 Col, 5)
Ana Llvia Cordero de Rosario, ) who collected signatures against the use of the atomic bomb . Manuel Arroyo Zeppenfeld, former head of the former Bureau of Materials, Printing and Transportation, and Ana Llvia Cordero de Rosario, a medical student at Columbia University and daughter of the Auditor of Puerto Rico, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero, were arranged in the vicinity of the New York Department Store in Santurce. There they had installed a table and chairs, and were dedicated to collect signatures of people against the use of the atomic bomb. After conducting the required investigation, Judge Fernandez, of the First Section of the San Juan Municipal Court, ordered both persons to be denounced for alleged violation of Municipal Ordinance No. 18, charging them with obstruction of free transit: The Judge further ordered that a bail of $200 be set for each of the accused. (As evidence in the case, the following has been filed (Continued on page 16, Col. 1)
Muñoz Begins Work On Referendum
Discussed Issue With PDP Leaders In Meeting Held Yesterday At Capitol Analyzed Constitution Law By Juan Martinez Chapel. EL MUNDO Staff Writer The leadership of the Popular Democratic Party is preparing to begin its campaign in favor of the electorate, through special votes, to give its support to the Constitution Law recently approved by Congress. The president of the party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, called for a meeting that was held yesterday afternoon in the caucus hall of the Capitol with the attendance of most of the presidents of the local committees of the party, the mayors and legislators belonging to the group and the members of the Council of Founders who continue "within the party. Muñoz speaks With the attendance of more than three hundred people, the event began at three o'clock in the afternoon, under the presidency of Governor Muñoz Marín. At the presidential table and next to Mr. Muñoz Marín was the former governor, Don Jesús T. Piftero. President Muñoz Marín began his discussion, which he did in a familiar conversational tone, explaining his reasons for taking part in an act of his party occupying the office of Governor. He stated that in democracies where the people elect their governors, they have the obligation to guide the people in all matters of general interest. (Continued on page 16, Col. 6) UN Flag For MacArthur TOKYO, 1üuTlí7"(PU)- General Douglas MacArthur said in a message to United Nations Secretary General Trygve Lie that the end will be "victory in Korea." MacArthur, supreme commander of the United Nations in South Korea, sent the message to Lie through Lie's personal representative at a ceremony during which MacArthur received the United Nations flag for his headquarters. The flag was brought to Tokyo by the Chief of Staff of the Army, General J. Lawton Collins. MacArthur said at the ceremony held in the Dal Chl terrazzo building where the headquarters is located: Accept Flag "I accept this flag with pro- < funda emotion. It symbolizes one of i the greatest efforts ever made by man to liberate himself. The command of the Far West (Continued on page 16, Col. 5) 1
West Point of E.L. Line Broken.
MacArthur Believes Situation Serious - Aviation In Desperate Wing By FRANK TREMAINE I TOKYO, Saturday, July 15 (PU)-. North Korean Communist troops crossed the Kum River today in a series of advances aimed at dis* truting the western flank of the main American dafenan line. The Americans fought bravely, but were retreating on the western end of the line. A dispatch from! baU- ■ lia front said that the Americans were holding firm on the eastern end of the Kum River line, where the Communists had not attempted to cross the river in large files. The dispatch said that Jos norco- | roans on the extreme western H H American front, north of< Taejon, had succeeded in extending their beach strength. Strengthened their ag" 1 rre on the southern bank of the Kum g the Communist Infanferlar was trying d< to break through the North American defenses! I! 1 canas by rapid infantry charges. The Communist beachhead | was about nineteen miles i i northwest of Taejon, where the aud i
Koreans have had their capita! tem J I I porera since they were expelled i two from Seoul, June 2R do. (Previous dispatches from the front d" I Clan that the North Koreans speak ro 1 to the western end of the American H ? nea of defense, j | ' that some invaders used the U.S. Army field unit. The front dispatch also In dicaha that the danger of attacking the American lines, now that there are many communist soldiers wearing the same uniforms as the U.S. Army, has increased American ark activity. In a dispatch telephoned to To. kio at half past nine o'clock Saturday morning (seven o'clock Friday night, Puerto Rican time) United Press correspondent Rutheford Poats, reported from ri front quo as two hundred Red troops had crossed the Rio cenca from the center of the American line in the early morning. There is no means of determining how many more Communist soldiers have reached the southern bank under the cover of night," Poats reported. Poats also revealed that the American fighters were crossing the river to attack the American defenses. "American fighters reported that they destroyed four red tanks attempting to cross the river this morning, three of them on the southern bank and one in the center of the river, apparently (Continued on p. 16, col. 6Í J
' W'"- i w Bi s B' JHI9B j m c f f 4 <* #-</** A? & B - v wWI I . B 4TR; L 1 V ITWy/rzzx jBET: 1 rn r bA'1 " nf jMhBl.- ~ 1 -T c¥ z k hkTMIMl \ bmmb B BB b k- J 1 E '- zJb Oí m W_1Z Z j| | | \i t jKHMB' vsn HL - ■ ' JSNMNMmMI Xj9e JBwBm' IIBBBs m ' JB - jfBfB 1 W BU B /AB B A B JH 9%l 5"- > W Jll-V w % * - wíA B Ib w B si EtBKkfl B ALm' B í B* X JB ' ■ i "i BBB fl MmiB&'XMi BBBBBGNnBBBBBBBBiBBBBHBBi : I
Four people were arrested yesterday while soliciting signatures in San Juan and Santurce, against the use of the atomic bomb, carrying a sign that read: "Against the Use of the Atomic Bomb,
Use It, Whoever Uses It, Sign Here." From left to right: Pablo M. Garcia, president of a Puerto Rican world peace organization; Manuel Arroyo Zeppenfeldt; Antonio Cuevas Arbona, president of the Puerto Rican Union of Youth, and Antonio Cuevas Arbona, president of the Puerto Rican World Peace Organization.
aldente da la Unión da Juventudes Puertorriqueñas; the card carried by the petitioners; and Ana Llvia Cordero Garcés, daughter of the Auditor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Rafael de J. Cordero, who appears here at the time,
who appears here at the "moment" when he was telephoning for bondsmen. Jues Victoriano M. Fernandez, ma. of resolved that there was no cause of action against the arrestees.