THE KONDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy to cloudy with scattered showers today and in the evening. IN SAN JOAN. AYEB; -Ten "* peraturu maximum, M degrees; minimum, 71 gradea. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:M this afternoon, 29.7! inches of mercury.
In the afternoon this afternoon the following temperatures were reported: New York, 69; Chicago, 58; Washington, 75; Miami, 88. Highest temperature near "5.
LA MARANA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered aa second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 21, 1950
NUMBER 14177 FIVE CENTAVOS
Paratroopers Close Reds Trap
Muñoz Claims To Dedicate Actions To Avoid Press Monopoly The Governor Makes An Account Of His Assets And Exposes His Ties With Diario de Puerto Rico
Pravda Rejects Stassen's Idea He Asked Stalin To Discuss Peace Russian Newspaper Calls His Letter 'Impertinent' And A Bluff Per HENRY SHAPIRO MOSCOW, Oct. 20. (PU)-Prsv-da t the official organ of the Communist Party. today rejected Harold E. Stassen's proposal for holding "peace talks" with "Premier Josef Stalin calling them "a self-exploring, self-advertising stunt." A three-column article by Yakov Vlctorov on the back page of Pravda described the letter rl* Stassen to Stalin as "a foul play...alendo indubitable from the first words of the letter that even elementary good faith is alien to Stassen." Privon accused Stassen of an "election maneuver" with the object of Influencing the "vast masses of American voters who are deeply alarmed by the aggressive course of policy of the American rulers, in an unparalleled arms competition and preparation for a new war." Stassen, president of the University of Pennsylvania, former governor of Minnesota and a two-time aspirant for the Republican presidential nomination, revealed that he had written to Stailn on October 4. Writing as a private citizen, Stassen suggested that they confer on steps to be taken to achieve a "just world peace." He said the Soviet Union would have to reverse its present course if it was to halt the trend toward war. The 1947 conference Stassen reminded Stailn of the conference they had held in 1947 and said that everything he had told the Premier then had proved true. Despite Soviet predictions, he said, there had been no depression in the United States. Pravda said that Stassen was "a notorious warmonger who was a war monger and who was not in a position to make a war." (Contlnued on page 14, Col. 6) Governor Addresses Labor Situation Governor Muñoz Marin held an interview yesterday afternoon with the leaders of the Consejo Insular de Uniones Independien tes, a new labor union headed by Senators Ernesto Carrasquillo, Ramon Barreto Perez, and Representative Francisco Diaz Marchand. The meeting was held secretly in Luquillo for undisclosed purposes, but it was said that everything related to the situation that has recently arisen within the labor movement on the island was discussed. Movements Discussed It was revealed to this newspaper that in the meeting, in which participated in addition to labor leaders of the CIUI, popular leaders and the Labor Commissioner, Fernando Sierra Berdecla, Governor Muñoz Marin received reports on the situation in organized labor, the unity movement of the independent unions, and the other that has been initiated by Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonini, Secretary of External Relations of the CGT (CIO). Mr. Ramos Antonini did not attend the meeting, nor did Mr. Tomás Méndez Mejias, president of the CGT (CIO),
Governor Luis Muñoz Marin declared yesterday that the ten thousand dollars worth of stock that he owns in Diario do Puerto Rico he is "dedicating to try to keep away the harmful possibility of a journalistic monopoly." He stated that "the only authority that possessing that small number of shares in Diario de Puerto Rico gives is the authority to maintain an editorial attitude in defense of the basic work that is being developed to go about solving the problems that confront our people." In his remarks, in which he listed aua personal assets, he said, commenting on the nréstamo requested by Diario de Puerto Rico, that "if I were the Banco de Fomento I would feel a deep desire to help Diario de Puerto Rico to help avoid in that way an approach to journalistic monopoly extremely (Continued on page 14 col. 1)
T.TTM MYTItnZ MARIN
Bidding for Psychiatry Hospital Works Auction Opens, Includes Ira. Stage,- Error Prevented Consideration of a Half Million Underbid by r7gXlVEZ~MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO ui Auction Board of the Department of the Interior. Composed of seAore* Jesús Benuez Castaño. Angel O) Silva and Manuel Martorell, proceeded yesterday afternoon to anrlr the bidding documents for the construction of the first stage in the works of the new Psychiatry Hospital, estimated at a cost of approximately 9
three million dollars. The first stage comprises an Administration and Admissions building; a building for the tubercular insane; two buildings for chronically mentally ill patients; three industrial buildings and a building for mentally inactive patients. The entire first stage of the project is expected to be completed within 720 days of the award of the bid. The proposals were divided into three areas, numbered 1, 2 and 3, and included the following projects: - Area 1, Administration and Receiving Building; area 2. building for tuberculosis patients and area 3, buildings for mental patients in chronic condition, Industrial buildings and building for Inactive patients. The Auction Board considered the proposals of five bidders representing five Puerto Rican firms, as follows: Felix A. Leon for construction of area 2, $548,400; Martin Martell, for construction of! area 3, $1,972, 684; Grlllasca. Mendez, Noya y Gallb, for construction of the three areas $3,832,249; Francisco Pona Inc, for construction of area 1, $1,213,037.91: for area number 2. $849,316.08; Gab.-el T. Guijarro, for construction of area 1. $1,165,995. for area 2, $577,401.75 and for number 3, $2,070,947.52. - Regrettable Error A regrettable error prevented the consideration of a proposal from the U.S. firm The Maxwell Gibbs Co. whose numbers were half a million dollars lower than any of the Puerto Rican bidders. At the end of the opening of the bids, the Chairman of the Auction Board, Mr. Jesús Benitez Castaño, announced that he would read a proposal, which was not considered by the Board due to the irregular and incomplete form in which it arrived. It was the proposal of The Maxwell Gibbs Co. who sent their proposal to the auction in an ordinary envelope, without certification. This envelope was opened by mistake in the mail, and the employees found that it contained proposals for the auction of the Asylum. As reported by Mr. Benitez Castaño, the envelope was forwarded to the Department of the Interior with (Continued on page 14 Col. 3")
Routes To Pisicorres To Port New Public Service Indicates They Must Arrive San Juan. The Public Service Commission yesterday issued a final order fixing the routes to be served, and the fares to be charged by certain buses running between Puerta Nuevo and San Juan, and vice versa. The order, issued against the request of the Metropolitan Vehicle Owners Association. Ine. (V. M.h is applicable only to vehicles with a capacity of no more than ten passengers that are authorized to transport passengers on the Fernandez Juncos route to Puerto Nuevo. Said order provides that these vehicles will not be able, as requested by the Public Service Commission, to cut their route "up to stop 18. (Many only went as far as that stop on their trips from Puerto Nuevo.) Now they must travel the complete route, that is, from Puerto Nuevo to San Juan and vice versa. The final decree of 1" CSP also provides for the following fares: San Juan to Puerto Nuevo and vice versa 15 cents. From stop 18 to Puerto Nuevo and vlceversa. 10 cents. These fares will be in effect from 5:01 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. Between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., the following fares will apply: From San Juan to Puerto Nuevo, or vice versa. 25 cents; from stop 18 to Puerto Nuevo, or vice versa, 20 cents. Other Provisions The order in question also provides that vehicles may park upon their return to San Juan in a place to be designated by the chief traffic inspector of the CSP, in which there will never be any parking (Continued "n la P. 14.-Col. 2).
Gaucho Consumption Limited Again, Steel Distillers Give Away Some of Their Alcohol. Claim There Will Be Tires, Whiskey By Raymond H. WILSON WASHINGTON, Oct. 20 (PU)-The Government today ordered further reductions in the consumption of rubber and stainless steel, and distillers voluntarily agreed to give up part of their alcohol for the defense industries. Government and industry officials immediately clarified that the reductions will not cause any shortages of tires, stainless steel products, or whiskey. But further restrictions may affect more. In a speech to the Holyoke Alumni Association here, Presidential Aide John R. Steelman said that the Government may re-impose credit restraints and that "we may need other controls to stop inflation. Economists at the Federal Reserve Board have been considering restrictions on open accounts at department stores, and loans that are paid off in one lump sum. Steelman did not explain what he meant by "other controls". Rationing Reductions on rubber and steel were announced by the National Production Authority. At the same time a formal system was put in place for the rationing of synthetic rubber manufactured by the Government. The order on rubber Umits civilian consumption to 90,000 tons per month during November and December and ensures 53,000 tons of natural rubber to the defense industries. A previous limitation, issued in August, imposed the same 90,000 ton limit, but as a result of the exceptions, civilian rubber consumption rose (Continued on p. 14 Col. 8),
The automobile owned by Ramon Antonio Four-Martines and remains in the police D "der. (Foniar, which was examined by the prosecutor Angel Vian tography of EL MUNDO).
Arrives in Ida Soldier of the 65th Infantry From Korea
Corporal Basilio Gonsales of Patillas, who is a member of Company "G" of the 66th Infantry, which is serving in Korea, gives General Edwin I- filbert, Chief of the Army in Puerto Rico, the latest information and news about the
Puerto Rican regiment and its members, as well as the role they are currently playing in the Asian peninsula. (Army photo).
Corporal Basilio Gonzalez Rivera Participated in War Action Says Health and Morale of Boricuas Is Very High. - (Captured Communist Soldiers on Patrol Duty).
Corporal Basilio González Rivera, of Patillas, who is assigned to Company "G" of the Second Battalion of the 65th Infantry Regiment, returned to Puerto Rico on a 30-day emergency leave to visit his wife, Mrs. Ida Fonseca González, who has been seriously ill for several days.
Corporal Gonzalez, who is one of the first Puerto Rican soldiers from the 65th Infantry to return to the island, has traveled more during the past 54 days than any other person in his life. By ship, Gonzalez arrived in Panama, then to Hawaii and Japan, and finally to Korea. By land, he was transferred to the Korean Interior to perform foot patrol missions on that mountainous peninsula, along with his fellow soldiers of the 65th Infantry. On October 11, Gonzalez left Korea by plane, en route to Japan where he boarded a "Northwest" airship, which took him on a long journey across the Pacific to the Aleutian Islands and Alaska, from where he then departed for California and Texas, respectively. From here Gonzalez traveled by train to Mobilq. Alabama, from where he was sent on an Air Force transport to Ramey Base in Aguadillo, Puerto Rico. Sibert received him upon his arrival in San Juan this morning. Gonzalez went to Army Headquarters in San Juan where he was interviewed by Brigadier General Edwin L. Sibert. The newly arrived member of the 65th Infantry told Gen. Slbert that in general the health of all the men of the 65th Infantry is excellent, and that they are coping very well with the weather in that country. He also stated that by the time he returned to the island the nights were getting quite cold. In his narration Gonzalez said that he was participating as a member of a patrol on the outskirts of a village which was the first area in which the Regiment was assembled upon its arrival in Korea, and where he took as prisoners several North Korean soldiers who (Continued on p. 14 Col. 2)
9 i ' - Courier Reports Another Increase In Air Tariff To Take Effect November 9. No Change In Matter Until 8 Oz. A note from the San Juan Post Office, authorized by Assistant Administrator C. Martinez Gomez, reports that the postal rates for domestic airmail correspondence have been revised to take effect November 1 next. The postage of 6 centavos per ounce or fraction of an ounce will continue for all domestic airmail correspondence whose weight does not exceed 8 ounces, regardless of distance or zone. Air postage according to zones is applicable to domestic matter weighing more than 8 ounces and not more than 70 pounds. Such matter shall not exceed 100 inches combined length and round measure. The zoned rate also includes written or first-class matter exceeding 8 ounces, sealed or unsealed, and fractions of pounds are charged as full pounds. The new rate will be as follows: Zones: First and Second - First Pound (over 8 oz.) 60c. Additional Pound 48c. Zone Sixth - First Pound (over 8 ounces) 75c. - Additional Pound 64c. Zone Seven: First Pound (over 8 oz.) - 75c. - Additional Pound 72c. Zone Eight: First Pound (over 8 ounces) - 80c. - Pound (Continued on p. 14 Col. 2)
Possible Evidence Ramon Fournier's Automobile Is Under Police Custody
By S. Ramirez Brau SL MUNDO Editor Since the arrest of Ramon Antonio Fournier, who was accused by the defendant Angel Viera Martinea of the murder of Irlo Nereida Hernandes Matos, this automobile, property of the accused, is under police custody at the General Headquarters, by orders of the police. The police authorities and the prosecutor Vlsra Martinss practiced a thorough examination of the car, and both digital cameras and photographers carried out their work in the investigation. The vehicle was searched in its entirety, not including the trunk. Yesterday, the prosecutor Viera Martines reported that he had continued the investigation related to the death of Iris Nsroida Hernandas Matos, notwithstanding the work that he had had to do in the
qua has had to perform an the ■ala de! Tribunal de Dietrito. No Rovtls Motive The prosecutor Viera indicated that in hours books he has continued to investigate former employee! of the Fournier funeral agency, domestic Fournier family and other pereonao close to this family. As for the motive of the crime imputed to Ramon Antonio Foumior, he said ol fioeal that he was not yet ready to make it known to the Prenca. Tros Tostigos E stroll os The San Juan Prosecutor said that he has numoroaos testigoc to prove au caco. Among them are some that he considers as "octrellac". One oa the one who delved the foea further down the second bunk; the peraona who had the key to the Cemetery and another who, as con.(Continued on P. 1*-Col. 6)
There are 28,700 Escaping Northward MacArthur Claims the End is Near Witnessed Operation North of Pyongyang. Guerrillas Expected By RALPHTEATSORTH TOKYO, Saturday, Oct. 21. (PU)' - The allies launched their final offensive in Korea Friday, with a daring paracaldlstae launch 86 miles from the Manchurian border, and General Douglas MaoArthur said the war was nearing an end. WONSAN, Korea, Saturday, October 21 -(PU)-Ganeral Commander E. M. Almond, Chief of the Tenth Corps, sent the South Korean 1st Corps toward the Manchurian border a few hours after he assumed command of the Northeast Korean theater of war. The South Korean Third Division, which had been patrolling in the Wonsan sector, advanced northward on Friday afternoon to trap the "devils on foot," the Capitol Division, which ignored orders to halt and advanced another 25 miles north of Hamhung and Hungnam. By Friday night, the advanced units of the Capitol Division were within two miles of the Manchurian border. Meanwhile, this captured port city took on the atmosphere typical of an American center - as U.S. Tenth Corps units arrived, there were English signs on the streets. The Marine Corps renamed the main avenue Smith Boulevard, in honor of the Commander of !- Frtawra Division, Major General Oliver P. Smith, The enemy had been destroyed everywhere, unable to withstand the blows of the continuing U.N. offensive, begun on September 15. Pyongyang, the Communist capital, was in Allied hands and the launching of the 4," 000 paratroopers was intended ■ to close a trap against the 28,700 Reds fleeing to the North. McArthur flew to Korea to deal with the latest operations of the war, begun by Russian-equipped communists four months less four days ago. The Supreme Allied Commander escorted the paratroopers to their objectives at Sukchon and Sunchon, 30 miles northeast and north of Pyongyang, and then ordered the ground forces advancing north of the capital to capture the fleeing Red forces. Little Opposition The paratroopers' operation, which was preceded by a bombardment and machine gun air strike, was perfectly coordinated. The paratroopers encountered very little opposition, as far as the air observers could determine. No troop reports have been received, however, because lines of communications have not yet been established. "I thought it was perfect," said General MacArthur of the operation, "It apparently constituted a complete surprise to the Reds. All indications are that we have closed the trap. Definitely, the war is rapidly approaching its end". MacArthur immediately ordered the allied forces to push up to the Manchurian border. He also ordered United Nations troops to prepare for a hard fight during the winter against the red guerrillas - the remnants of the Red Army. (Continued on page 14 Col. 7) Export of Puerto Rican and U.S. Malaga Banned WASHINGTON, Oct. 20 - The Commerce Department today banned the export of U.S. and Puerto Rican molasses to help insure supplies for "red uses" in this country. The ban was ordered at the request of the Department of Agriculture, because domestic stocks are very low and demand is very high, primarily for livestock feed and for the manufacture of industrial alcohol. Small Economy The order, however, is expected to provide only a small economy, since the melase quo is exported to the continental United States and Puerto Rico only amounted to "M I million gallons. In addition, the new ban does not apply to Canada.
Géígel Issues Twelve Rules To Prosecutors
Outlines How To Perform Work Rules For Arecibo Section Are Applicable To Rest Of Island The Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, yesterday formulated 12 work rules for the prosecutors of the District Court in Arecibo. The action came as a result of an admlnlstratlva Investigation practiced by the Attorney General Espedal. José C. Aponte, following instructions from the Chief of Justice. The Attorney General told EL MUNDO that the rules established by him are applicable to all prosecutors on the Island. The following are the rules established: * 1. The book of filings of 1a Prosecutor's Office must be in the office' of the District Attorney of the Session, and it is in that office where the cases must be entered once filed* two in court. This task is the responsibility of the stenographer of the District Attorney of the Section, who shall record the case number, as it corresponds to the docket book, and the case number in the Clerk's office. 2. Should not depend exclusively on the investigation carried out by the municipal judges and justices of the peace for the filing of charges, the prosecutor corresponding to the municipality where the facts have occurred, shall be responsible for the same if for any circumstance it has not been possible for this prosecutor to personally conduct the investigation. Custody of Evidence 3. The evidence of the cases shall be in the custody of the Section Fls* col of the Section and shall be delivered on the day of the case to the fWsl who is to conduct the in-court investigation. 4. The files of the above-mentioned cases shall be handed over to the prosecutors who are to represent the People in court at least the last week prior to the month in which the cases are to be heard. This prosecutor, upon receipt of the files, shall deliver a receipt to the stenographer of the District Attorney of the Section, who shall cross out the cases from said receipt as the trials are held and the files are returned by the Prosecutors. Complaints related to children under the age of Id corresponding to the nine towns of the Arecibo Section shall be handled by each prosecutor within the work shift and municipalities assigned to him/her according to the plan agreed upon between the Department of Justice and the Public Welfare Division of the Department of Health. Work of Assistants 6. The assistant prosecutors shall submit a daily report to the prosecutor in charge of the Section of all cases submitted to them and of the investigations conducted in the respective offices of the Prosecutor's Office. 7. Prosecutors shall be in their respective offices at 8:00 a.m. to organize the evidence of their cases for the day, and at 8:00 a.m. they shall be in the criminal courtroom where they have cases scheduled for hearing. If for any reason they do not have the evidence ready to enter the hearing of these cases, they shall inform the Court and request a recess to prepare. 8. In criminal investigations where the alleged defendants wish to testify voluntarily, their confessions should be taken in type, and if the accused can read and write correctly, he should write his confession in his own handwriting. Work Zones 9, The zones into which the (Continued on p. 14, Col. 4>
Treasurer Alters Rules for Appraisal of Automobiles
Vehicles imported into the Island may be appraised in Mayagüez and Ponco for the purpose of payment of excise taxes to the Island Treasury. It was officially reported that in order to make this possible, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico amended the Regulation on the Appraisal of Automobiles for the purpose of payment of said taxes. Until now, taxpayers importing motor vehicles were obliged to bring them to San Juan from any point on the Island to be appraised. These vehicles were purchased in the United States. Now these vehicles may not only be appraised in San Juan, but also in Ponco and Mayagüez. By virtue of the amendment introduced to the regulations in question, the
The Treasury Department's Vehicle Appraisal Unit will be able to operate in the three cities. It was informed that the Island Treasurer has instructed the Chief of the Bureau of Internal Revenue to continue training its personnel so that these facilities may be extended to all the districts of the Bureau, which currently number eleven, but which are planned to be reduced to seven. New Measure It was explained that the new measure is due to the fact that many taxpayers, especially in Ponco and Mayagüez, have been continuously complaining about the difficulties or inconveniences caused by the taxpayer's (Continued on page 14 Col. 8)