THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 18 degrees; low, 88 degrees. Sea level barometric prealon, at 4:80 p.m., 30.08 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Feb. 8. (PU) Today afternoon *e will record ím atgulentaa temperatures: New York, M; Chicago 82; Wáihlngta, 86; Miami, M. Predictions: Weather "oleado eon temperatures typical of the season. Highest temperature will be 12. Winds variable from light to gusty.
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
YEAR XXX
Entered aa second class matter. Poet Office. San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY FEBRUARY 4, 19.50
NUMBER 13922
FIVE CENTS
Coloso Fire Destroys 50,000 Sugar Containers
Four People Injured Estimated Losses at $60,000. The Origin of the Incident Is Being Investigated About 50,000 empty sacks, such as those used to ship sugar, were destroyed and four people were injured in a dreadful fire that broke out in a warehouse at the Central Coloso, in Aguada, yesterday morning. The first news received by Police Headquarters was a telegram sent by Captain Santiago Martinez, from Aguadilla. He informed that the fire had developed at 7 A.M., and that at the time the dispatch was transmitted (12:30 P.M.), the fire was still burning. Tnmhlén informed Captain Martinez that the firemen of the Insular Service and those of the Army in Punta Rorin'quen, were cooperating in the extinction of the siniestro, M.000 Raeos Destruidos EL MUNDO communicated yesterday with the corporal Toro Lugo, of the Police of Aguada, in request of details of the fire, Informing this one that the Fire that he speaks commented to the 7 A. M. was extinguished at 3 P. M. The fire developed in a warehouse of the Central Coloso, intervening in the work of extinction as much the insular firemen as the federal ones of the Borlnquen Base. It is estimated - provisional estimate - that the fire destroyed between 40,000 and 50,000 empty big bags of pita, used for packing sugar. Corporal Toro Lugo reported that Central personnel, members of the Aguadilla and Aguada Police cooperated with the firefighters to subdue the fire. Also, Corporal Toro Lugo informed that the Coloso's administrators cannot estimate the losses suffered with the fire until next Monday. The steel and cement warehouse was damaged and the fire destroyed numerous pallets of sacks. Others were saved. During the incident four people were injured: Bernabé Villanueva Mercado, 36 years old, who received a contusion on his right shoulder; Vicente Núñez López, 38 years old, who was hospitalized at the Cardona Clinic in Aguadilla, with serious contusions on his back and other parts of his body, and Solindo Babilonia, 23 years old, (Continued on page 14 Col. 7). 14 Col. 7) Educational Page Villaronga Urges Use of Material in Schools There are 15 supervisors of the Department of Instruction investigating and observing the use by schools of the educational page published daily in EL MUNDO and El Diario de Puerto Rico. Teachers are instructed by the Department to use, to the maximum extent possible, the Informa- clones and didactic material supplied to the schools by means of the educational page. The pages should be retained by teachers and students, according to Commissioner Villaronga, because the material published therein is difficult to obtain from other sources. Commissioner Villaronga added that he was "very pleased and satisfied" with the work being done by the staff in charge of editing the educational page, and with the cooperation provided by EL MUNDO and El Diario de Puerto Rico.
> _ . - Island Sailors Arrested In New York Lott Accused Of Drug Trafficking With Group Of Peruvian Shipmates NEW YORK (PU) - Thirty-one Puerto Rican and Peruvian sailors were indicted by a federal grand jury for participating in a drug distribution network allegedly set up to finance a communist revolution in Peru. Israel Medina, 38, second engineer of the Grace Line ship Snnta Cecilia, was *1 the main defendant in yesterday's trial. It is said that this gang is the same that was headed by Eduardo Balarezzo, 48 years old, who has already "been convicted of similar accusations. Don Fernando Berckmeyer, Peruvian emhajádor in the United States, described the arrest of the 31 men charged, as the latest stage in smashing the narcotics political movement. "Now I can reveal, with the authorization of my government, all the details of how Victor Haya de la Torre, head of the Aprlsta Party, who is now outlawed, seized control of the cocaine trade to put Peru under the red flag," Berckmeyer said in a statement issued by his secretary here. The purpose of the Aprlsta Party was to foment communist revolution in ml pals and to establish a dictatorship in which democracy and freedom would be destroyed'. Berckmeyer said the government (Continued on pg. 14, col. 6) Chambers Summoned For Tribute Warren Austin Is First To See Distinguished Guest Summoned For Entertainment By Juan Martines Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Governor yesterday issued a proclamation summoning the Legislature to a special session next Monday for the sole purpose of affording legislators an opportunity to officially welcome to this Island former Senator Warren Austin, United States representative to the United Nations. This is the first time in the history of Puerto Rico that a special session is convened to pay tribute to a distinguished guest. On several occasions the Legislature has held special sessions to hear or honor a prestigious visitor and friend; but on those occasions the visitors' arrival has been during times when the Legislature was in session. On Tuesday afternoon, the Governor met in Fortaleza with the Speaker of the House, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl and the President of the Senate, Mr. Samuel R. Quiñones, to agree on the official acts to be performed in honor of former Senator Austin during his stay in Puerto Rico. At that time, the convocation of the extraordinary session was determined by the Executive and the legislative presidents. Mr. Austin will deliver a speech at this event. The Governor's proclamation, signed yesterday at half past four o'clock (Cont. on Ja. page 14, Col, 5>
Boston Court Meets Here for the First Time Tuesday
On Tuesday of next week, the Boston Circuit Court of Appeals will convene for the first time in Puerto Rico. The appellate court, whose judges and other officials will arrive on the island tomorrow, Sunday and Monday, will hold its first session in Puerto Rico, in the courtroom occupied by the Federal Court, to hear the first of the thirteen criminal and civil cases brought before it on appeal. Tomorrow, Sunday, Judge Albert B. Maris, Judge of the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, will arrive in San Juan by plane, who, together with two judges of the First Circuit, will constitute the Boston Court in San Juan. On Monday, First Circuit Judges Calvert Magruder and Peter Woodbury will arrive on the steamship Puerto Rico. The judges will be accompanied by
their law clerks, clerks, and wives. For one week the judges will hear thirteen calendar cases in Puerto Rico. They will then move to Santomas where they will sit on the Third Circuit Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. A program of entertainment has been prepared for the visiting justices, including a reception hosted by Federal Judge David Chávez, Jr.; a luncheon at Fortaleza to be hosted by Governor Muñoz Marin; a luncheon hosted by the Supreme Court; a banquet hosted by the Federal Bar; and a cocktail reception hosted by the Puerto Rico Bar; a luncheon hosted by José G. González, president of the Federal Bar, and a tour of Mayagüez and Ponce (continued on p. 14, Col. 8).
Heavy Rains Flood Sectors Of The Metropolitan Area
The heavy rains that fell early yesterday morning caused this landslide in the Puerto Nuevo neighborhood. Tons of earth and stones fell from a hill near 12th Street, covering the yards of three cases in the neighborhood. As can be seen in the photograph, the earth in some cases obstructed the exit from the back of the residences. (Photo by EL MUNDO* INlHsHhuí Wrap -■ - V S stW _2TL Tí B ir í f " Mr
Los Capitaleños Reciben Letty I Kii Aeropuerto Esta Hizo rii Entrada Hastía Casa Alcaldía. - She was received at the airport yesterday afternoon with a "cannon fire" by the San Juan Carnival Queen, Her Majesty Letty Gil GulHermety, who landed in a plane of the Transportation Authority. Her Majesty was received by Admiral Daniel E. Barbey, chief of the Tenth Naval District; Se. Salvador V. Caro, director of the Transportation Authority; her ladies-in-waiting; the members of the Carnival Executive Committee and her royal colleagues, Their Majesties Rosa Mercedes Ferraluoll and Luis M. Noya, Children's Kings of Carnival Ponce d" León. Two Navy platoons saluted the Queen as she passed with her Court of Honor, and the Randa of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of Mayagüez performed the dance of Angel Mlslán, Tu y Yo. Barbey Toasts to Her At the airport, before leaving for San Juart, a champagne toast was made to Her Majesty Letty I and the success of the Carnival festivities. Admiral Barbey toasted the queen and her ladies-in-waiting. The caravan of the Queen and her ladies began in uncovered cars. Upon arriving at stop 26 on Fernandez Juncos Avenue, the caravan of automobiles headed towards Ponce de Leon Avenue. When the royal retinue arrived at the Casa de España, a platoon of the Resirva Training Officers greeted Her Majesty, and the ROTC Band played a piece, and the Queen was escorted by Commander De la Vega, to the Municipality of San Juan. In the Baldorloty Plaza the Queen was received by the public. A salvo of rockets detonated the space. The Band of the College of Agriculture played several musical pieces. Her Majesty Letty I entered the Municipality accompanied by the Queen of the Cultural Action Club, Miss Carmen Luz Rosarlo, followed by her ladies of honor. The Mayoress of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, handed over the key of the Municipality to Her Majesty, and immediately proceeded to the official reception on the terraces of the City Hall. The Carnival festivities are extended (Continued on p. 14, Col. 6)
The water rose to a level higher than that of the Balcones in Puerto Nuevo; water supply reserves doubled For S. GALVES MATURASA Editor of F.L MUNDO Several sections and urbanizations of the metropolitan area were flooded yesterday due to the heavy downpours of the rainy season.
Arrest Of Scientist Causes Alarm Even Motivated White House Meeting - Had Atomic Secret By LOUIS CASSELS WASHINGTON, February 3 - <PU) -- Official Washington was greatly alarmed today by the arrest in London, on charges of espionage, of atomic scientist Karl Fuchs, who was privy to the most vital American "secrets" and may have turned them over to Russia. Two investigations were immediately ordered. The Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy called Lieutenant General Leslie R. Groves, head of the Manhattan atomic project during the war, to appear for testimony at 10:30 a.m. Saturday morning. He will be questioned behind closed doors about Euclu's work from 1943 to 1946 on the American atomic "atomic" project. Democrat Brien McMahon (Conectlcut), who chairs the committee, omitted an aupena for Groves, but he said he would appear voluntarily. Groves said at his home in Norwalk, Conn. Connecticut, that Fuchs was sent here in 1943 as a leading member of an English atomic mission and that his loyalty was "guaranteed by his own government. The House Committee on Un-American Activities announced that it will investigate Fuchs' activities in connection with the investigation begun some time ago into Russian atomic espionage during the war. Meeting With Truman President Truman . discussed the profimdas Implications of the arrest with his Cabinet, The White House disclosed that the Executive obtained reports of the Imminent arrest on Tue" shortly nnte" he ordered the" strictest precautions in the new American project "le manufacture of the hydrogen superbomb. Official statements of the American atomic authorities indicated that Fuchs had access to the stored endowments of the atomic bomb model used against Japan. Russia exploded an atomic bomb last summer - "a year" earlier than many American atomic experts had expected. (Continued on p. 14, Col. 2>>
During the early hours of the morning. * One of the "urbanizations most affected" by the floods was that of Puerto Nuevo, where in many streets the water rose to a level higher than the hawks of the houses, getting inside, with the consequent deterioration of the furniture. In the 12th Street of Puerto Nuevo there is a group of houses whose "patio" adjoins a high hill, from where stone has been extracted for constructions. The heavy downpours caused a landslide in this hill, falling several tons of stone and earth in the patio of the houses on 12th Street, with serious danger for the residents. Jos neighbors reported that no "e speak registered personal misfortunes, but that the noise ocaalonado by the stone and earth to fall, greatly alarmed the neighborhood. Section Down to the Water The hala section of Puerto Nuevo, known as "La" Bambúes, dawned practically under water yesterday morning. More than three feet" "uhló the water level in the streets of this section, preventing the neighbors" could leave their residence" to go to their regular occupations. Some automobiles that ventured to cross these streets", were trapped" in the middle of ,a Inundación, submerged until above the abutments, since in many Intersections the water reached up to four feet, according to what this writer could verify using a "meter" facilitated by a diligent carpenter Interested in knowing the height of the waters in 1 the site where his house is located. Likewise, the "acción donde está ubicada 1" parada de la* guaguas que transitan entre Puerto Nuevo y 1" Parada 15 was also under water. The entrance to Puerto Nuevo, located at the intersection of the road leading from Parada 15 to Bayamón and the road known as Matadero, was blocked by water. Nevertheless, numerous automobiles tried to cross it, with the result that several of them were unable to make it through the ordeal and were left in the middle of the road like floating gondolas (Continued on page 14, Col. 1).
Telefonica And Its Workers Reach Agreement Wage Increases Go Over Quarter Million Dollars For Lui* F. Ránche® Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO Last night, at 10:30, the impasse that existed in the negotiations between the representatives" of the Telephone Company and 1" Union of Employees" of the Telephone Industry was resolved. The following wage rate was agreed upon for the employees of the Telephone Company. A 15% increase will be given to employees earning up to $840 per year: 12% to those from $840.01 to $1,500: 10% to those from $1,500.01 to $1,800; R%% to those from $1,801 * $2,400, and increases "at the Company's discretion to those earning $2,400 and above. These increases will be paid retroactive to October 1, 1949. The contract, it was agreed, will be in effect for one and one-half years. It was also agreed to give a $3 monthly increase to the drivers, beginning on the date the agreement is signed. The food granted by the Telephone Company represents an expenditure of more than a quarter of a million dollars a year. j This agreement eliminates the strike threat made by the employees of the P. R. Telephone Company, and was reached by the Insular conciliators Adolfo Collazo and Rafael Rodriguez. Origin of the Dispute There was an impasse in the negotiations, which forced conciliator Collazo, of the Department of Labor, to intervene in the matter. Last night they were negotiating over an offer of a 15% increase in wages distributed among the company's different job classifications. Another point under discussion was the term of the agreement, which the Union demanded to be in effect for one year while the company asked for a one-year term.
Another Boricua at Eugenio Iglesias Cinema to Take Part in New Columbia Movie
W&C % J ' 1... r "' ■ .T. f - - - - - - . ' Here we see Eugenio Iglesias as he participated in a dramatization made in New York about the life of Muño* Marin. On the right' the announcer Miguel Rosas. The cable brings news that Iglesias* has been hired to appear in a Columbia film. 1
By Benjamin Arnaldo Meynera. NEW YORK, February 3. (Special to EL MUNDO)-A day of great emotions for the young Puerto Rican actor and declaimer, Eugenio Iglesias Carrillo, who for the past two years has been in New York, on a scholarship from the Government of Puerto Rico and pursuing advanced studies in the Drama Department of Columbia University. Suddenly, our young artist is on the threshold of glory, when he officially receives a proposal from Columbia Pictures to sign a contract with the company and act prominently in the filming of the movie, The Brave Bulla (Los Toros Valientes), based on the novel of the same title by the American writer Torn Lea. The contract between Eugenio Iglesias, represented by his agent, Mrs. Frances Robinson, who also represents another of our compatriots, Juano Hernandez, and the film company was signed yesterday at 4:30 p.m. at the Columbia Pictures office. The terms of the contract are very advantageous for the future star.
The conditions of the contract are very advantageous for the future star, who was selected after testing the artistic merits of more than five hundred applicants". A Hollywood representative of 1" Columbia Pictures, who came to New York in search of "new blood" for his company, met Eugenio Iglesias several days ago, taking an interest in him. After giving him several "film tests". Iglesias" received official confirmation today that he has been accepted by the director. Robhe Rossen, for one of the important roles in The Brave Bulls, whose main star will be Linda Christian, wife of actor Tyrone Power. Leaves for Hollywood After accepting the contract Eugenio Iglesias will leave for Hollywood, next Sunday, to receive in the capital of the cinematographer the" pertinent Instructions. From there, after a week, he will resume his trip to Mexico, where he will begin shooting the first part of the film, several scenes of which will also be shot in Hollywood. The production is scheduled to start (Continued on p. 14, Col, 8)
It is still unknown when the price of coffee will be fixed.
Census Applications Ready Local Office To Employ 2,200 Enamoradores. - Requirements are pointed out By Cario* Nieven Rivera Redaetor of EL MUNDO The Census Bureau will use about 2,200 urban and rural enumerators to take ?! 1 decennial census in Puerto Rico, as reported yesterday by Mr. Felix Mejias ' supervisor of the Census. The selection of enumerators for this work, according to Mr. Mejias, will be made "with rigorous care, since the work to be done is arduous, requires certain basic knowledge, and certain conditions of character". Every applicant for employment as an enumerator, Mejias declared, must be a citizen of the United" State" He shall be a graduate of e "cuela su-| perior or its equivalent. In addition, he must be able to follow oral and written instructions of a common character and be able to write clearly and correctly. Enumerators are also required to have the ability to conduct interviews, to present themselves clearly and convincingly, and to be courteous and respectful in order to gain the cooperation and trust of the entire ¡ population at all levels of play. He went on to report that the preferred age for employment as a census taker is between 25 and 45, although the census regulations set a minimum of 21 and a maximum of 65. All (Continued on p. 14, Col. 3) AAÁ Adjudicates: Loíza River Dam Work Chicago Firm Quoted $2,131,000 For 750-Day Term ! The bid for the construction of the dam on the Grande de Lolza River was awarded to Ja 'Irma contractor Sumner S. Solltt Si Company, of Chicago, for the price of $2,131,600.00, as reported yesterday by the Director of the Aqueduct and Sewer Authority, Mr. Sergio Cuevas. The auction was attended by o' ho bidders, with the highest bid coming from the aforementioned firm. Welbasch Cornoration of Flladelfla. quoted the amount of $2,201,200.00 and Hardaway Con. trading Company of Georgia, with $2,230,750. A single port firm, Méndez, Grillase", Noli", Galib y Márquez Inc. quoted for this work, its proposal being $2,482,680.00. The contractor agrees to complete the work in 750 days. However, it will not be necessary to wait for the completion of the dam to be able to use the waters of the Grande de Loíza River to supply the metropolitan area, because the filtration plant located in Truli'lo A lio, which will receive the waters of the river by means of a provisional set of pumps, is about to be completed. The water, after being treated in the filtration plant, will be injected into the metro system through a 4R" diameter transmission line that was installed a few months ago. Water Problem The dam will have a length of (Continued on pg. 14. Col. 6) i
Poor" Neighborhoods Raise Protest ' Cocoa Prices Rise. Probable Action by Legislature Pnr R. "ÁLVÉZ MATURANA. The General Administrator of Supplies, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Ríos, reported yesterday that he was not yet in a position to fix a maximum price for coffee, in accordance with the legislation approved last year by Governor Muñoz Marín. He indicated that he was not in a position to inform whether the Administrative Order would be issued before next Monday, stating that it could be issued at any time within the next few days, Crisis In Coffee Shops The prexalerlent situation due to the coffee shortage had made itself felt until yesterday in the retail trade, However, during the day yesterday the "ituarion began to take another turn when several coffee shops" in San Juan and Puerto d" Tierra suspended the sale of coffee cups or । pocilios, " their parishioners. Only those large coffee shops, most of which buy raw coffee and brew it themselves, continued yesterday to sell the liquid product to their customers. Several residents" of the El Fanguito neighborhood informed the editor yesterday, in a tour of the poorest neighborhoods in the area, that many merchants have raised the prices of chocolate and cocoa, in view of the demand for both products due to the shortage of coffee. In the neighborhood 'ígi Perla" v "* rivers neighbors expressed their desire to visit " 1" Mayor" of S*n Juan, Mr." Fells" Rincón, to" intervene with the Governor and the Admlnlstrstrsdóí I of Supplies in order to seek an immediate solution to the ¡problem. i Juan Cortijo Ar*újo, a resident of the neighborhood, reported that the small grocery stores in the neighborhood lacked the product and that it was difficult for them to obtain orange leaves or jenjihre to replace the coffee in the morning. There's Coffee! As there is never a lack of humor in all these human problems of our population, Mr. Cortijo, as if he suddenly saw a guiding light shining in his brain, exclaimed .... t" is the coffee! Not long ago Mrs. Erla gave us some coffee cups so that we could brew our coffee in the mornings. .... Now she is "faje'?" with the Governor to get the coffee to use for the "en* lators. During the morning of yesterday " this editor" made it almost impossible for him to devote himself to his regular duties in the editorial office due to the innumerable Jlamnda" made in request for information on the Supply Order. Both the consuming public and the retail trade are still waiting for the action of the Supply Administration. I," uncertainty is such that they brought of obtaining advance information by telephone, ron such an imj patience that prevents them from aguari dar to the output of the poxt ¡ poxt newspaper at night. They expect Action ' On the other hand in legislative circles it was argued yesterday that the new price of coffee would not be fixed until yesterday. coffee would not be fixed until next week when the Legislature is to meet in its session । (Cont. on page 14. Col. 5).
Labor Undersecretary Wright Makes Study on Island
The federal official came to the island for the purpose of making contact with the officials of the agencies attached to the federal Department of Labor in Puerto Rico, as well as to familiarize him with the work being done by these agencies. ! Mr. Wright informed this newspaper that his visit to Puerto Rico is an official one, but he pointed out that no specific matter motivated his visit. He stated that "the federal Department of Labor is deeply interested in the development of labor-related programs in Puerto Rico, as well as in the administration on the island of federal and island labor laws," and for that reason, he added, he decided to come to the island "to observe on the ground the work being done. 1 (Continued on p. 14 Col. -7)
, wí/. lug*'} ■ ■ ■ RALPH WEIGHT.