FI bfiNDO
H2 ,O Í55°!L SJSSPJÍSÍ ü loved 4ls*en "i. u Mb£ lemlasr* - aiHMs "m roye sar.xfmíñBM* SAM* JUAM "ÁrVa **"oasmtan ■Sabe*, n m4w. aiataa. 1" r*4M Prntes bsreaámu the aivai Cel asr a tea 4iM do Is teHo. SO* oslrtasi do aer-.
NEW YORK, aguato 81. (PU). -Today afternoon m reported laa alguientea temperatures: New York, 87; Chicago, 89; Wáshlngton, 86; Miami, 86. Forecast" for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cludadoa"; mostly cloudy, with scattered showers" and thunderstorms. High, 79.
LA MARANA DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
EnWrtd Pm* (
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 2, 1950
FIVE CENTS
- a" HV*'
NUMBER 14129
v AJvAl
I M M Ottlea.
U.S. Troops Recover Ground Lost in the South
Advanced With Aviation Support
Palou Firm Business Described
-7.
Lieutenant Alejandro Oliveras identifies from the witness chair the key shown to him by prosecutor Baldomcro Freyre, as the key used to open the padlock on the entrance door to Almacenes Palou.
(Photo EL MUNDO.)
Accountant Says Castro Anguita Did Not Intervene Administration
The Statement Unsettled Prosecutor, Who Argued With His Witness -* A Contribution of 88,000.00
The trial of Lucas Castro Anguita, accused of eight counts of murder and two counts of attempt on his life, was resumed at 10:00 a.m. yesterday morning, when the accountant of the Palou department store, Mr. Felix Vega Bauza, resumed the witness chair.
LalslaAdopts Protective Measures Cyclone Threat Puts It on Alert Agencies and Organisms Carried Out Activities Protect Property For 8. GÓIvm Maturana Editor of EL MUNDO Once again the threat of a tropical disturbance affecting the island put the civilian population and government and private entities on alert yesterday. (Governor Muflo" Marín yesterday afternoon instructed the heads of government departments and agencies to immediately dispatch public employees. The order was transmitted at about three o'clock in the afternoon. The Heads of agencies and departments gave me immediate instructions to secure public property and equipment, and ordered the dispatch of their employees). The heavy downpours during the dawn and the morning of yesterday caused uneasiness in the population, which saw in the same ones an omen of the consequences that could bring to the Island this cyclone, that threatened yesterday in its trajectory to pass on Puerto Rico. The Captaincy of the Port another voice sent telegrams to all the captains in the ports of Fajardo, Humacao, Arroyo. Ponce. Guayanilla. Guanlcs. Mayagüez and Aguadilla urging to remain alert and in conditions to provide immediate service to any small vessel that needs help at the precise moment. ** All the captains of port yesterday morning have issued precautionary warnings to the smaller vessels, so that they remain alert to the communications, blpn by radio or through direct information, on the trajectory of the disturbance. The Chief of the Bureau of Mué. lies and Ports, Seftor Manuel Hen. rlquez informed yesterday afternoon that all the pertinent instructions were sent to the captains of ports of the Island, in accordance with the rules established for cases of storm. Airport Alert The Transportation Authority informed yesterday Friday morning that all its personnel were once again on alert. As is known, since July there has been a plan established by the Transportation Authority, whereby each airport employee has been assigned his or her duties. As soon as the Airport Weather Bureau notifies the imminent danger to the Island, the plan begins to operate automatically. The final announcement of the passage of the disturbance over the island was expected yesterday to move the planes out of Puerto Rico to the free zone, and at the same time drive the small planes to the hangar provided for the purpose by the Navy in the Navy section of the Isla Grande Airport. The airport personnel are kept constantly on alert, each in his assigned position within the plan, until the pe* (Continued on page 16, Col. 5)
Offensive on the Naktong River Reinforcement units recapture Haman. Attack 1,150 Aircraft By Earneit Hoberecht TOKYO, liberated, Sept. 1 - (FU)- North American forces, supported by 1,150 planes, are to attack the Naktong River. American forces, supported by 1,150 fighter and bomber planes, counterattacked after having been forced to retreat from the initial assault of the biggest Communist offensive of the Korean war, and recaptured the destroyed town of Haman while preparing to counterattack on the Naktong River front as well. American reinforcement units were quickly sent to the sector occupied by the Vlgéslmocuarto Infantry Regiment formed by colored soldiers and that had faced the first reinforced troops, * supported by intense air attacks. They began the counterattack at 4 o'clock on Friday afternoon, and by 8 o'clock in the evening they had regained the lost ground and were fighting west of the smoking and shattered Haman. Haman, 13 and a half kilometers from the port of Milan, is at the southern end of an 80-kilometer front along which the North Korean communists unleashed their biggest offensive and managed to advance more than 13 kilometers in some places. The midnight communiqué from General Douglas MacArthur said that "according to the latest reports, Haman is held by a Communist group of about 300 men," but according to the spokesman, the "latest reports" from headquarters regarding the fighting in that sector were received at 4:00 P. M., while the subsequent dispatch from United Press correspondent Charles Corddry spoke of the occupation of the population by the Americans. On the Naktong River front further north, where the Communists crossed the river in 17 places, the spokesman for the U.S. Second Infantry Division said, "We are killing Communists by the hundreds." In the Masan area the initial assault was said to have cost the communists about a thousand men. Regarding the American casualties, it was stated that they were "moderate to high". Airborne 1.1M Dispatches from the front indicated that the Reds were using in their offensive about 50,000 men. But many of their divisions had suffered heavy casualties in the previous encounters, and they might not be at full strength. To counter the North Korean offensive, the United Nations high command launched 1,150 fighter and bomber planes into the air, concentrating their attacks mainly in the Haman area. At times the fighter planes strafed the communist troops, only 50 (Continued on page 16, CoL 4)
Court of Appeals Orders Dismissal But Reduces Sentence The Department of the Army at Washington affirmed the judgment and sentence of a military court of lilac against Captain Rafael H. Dominguez, medical officer, and ordered his dismissal as an officer of the United States Army, effective "n Ja midnight next September 5. Elér--cito headquarters in San Juan received yesterday a radiogram from Wáshlngton. Informing further that the Army Legal Officer has reduced the prison sentence against Captain Dominguez from three and a half years to one year, and that upon review of the cost, the Secretary of the Army has decided that Dominguez should be released immediately. That is, he should not serve the remainder of the prison sentence that was ultimately imposed in the case, and should be released from confinement at the Fort Buchanan Detention and Rehabilitation Center. Attempted Homicide Captain Dominguez, who is a native of Humacao, was arrested by military authorities on January 5 of this year while stationed at Camp Losey Field, near Ponce, for an alleged attack with a firearm against another Army officer. According to the indictment, Captain Dominguez stalked and shot at Lieutenant Mitchell, who at the time was assistant chief engineer at Losey Field, as Mitchell was approaching his work office at the military facility. It was alleged that Captain Dominguez accused Lieutenant Mitchell of having killed a dog owned by the former, and therefore attempted to kill him with a .45 caliber pistol. A court-martial tried the ca(Continued on Page 16, Col. 8)
Before continuing the dlfense the 4 i question of the witness Vega Bauzá, i Judge Suárez Garriga gave an account' of a request from juror Pedro' Goiabert, that he be replaced because he was not "psychically and physically- j mentally fit to continue in* 1 tending in the case." Invited to explain his situation, the juror clarified that the threat of a storm had him worried, the parties then agreed that the judge should allow the jury to separate from yesterday until next Monday. With the proposal of the defense x 101 prosecutors was resolved the question raised by the soAor Ge., labert, Initiating the lawyer Ochoteco the cross-examination of Vega Bauzá. No Intervention When questioned by the defense, the witness said that Lucas Castro Anguila had no intervention whatsoever in the administration of the Palou warehouses, and that the person who wrote checks, paid, received merchandise and made deposits in the banks was Miguel Angel Palou Márquez, managing partner of the firm Palou A Co. i The witness also stated that the safe of the Palou stores, according to the books, should have had on the date of December 14, 1949, the amount of 8539. and not 12 cents, which was what was found in it. To another question of the defense about the last purchases of the Palou warehouses, Vega Bauzá said that the same were made in the month of September 1949. and that they amounted to 82,524.12. Vega Bauzá also said that the last time he saw the defendant in the Palou warehouses was the 17th of (Continued on page 21, CoL 1)
The Industrial Development Administration continues to receive visits, both at its San Juan and New York offices, from Industrialists interested in setting up factories in Puerto Rico. The prospects for new industries, according to the Government's agenda, are flattering. In commenting on the movement in this respect during the past month of July, the Administration states: "The total number of visitors to our offices amounted to 41, of whom 13 were Puerto Ricans and 38 Americans, 'Three of the companies lately accepted have begun the installation of machinery and are almost ready to commence operations. "Frequent inquiries for general information about our industrial program have been coming in. Our advantageous geographic position has served as an Incentive (Continued on page 10, Col. 8).
Hurricane Vuto From a Navy Privateer Aircraft
-. ■ . a । - . - - , - - -". MB* ' -. ... ■■ í - * I ■ \ . i " -y ' ■ ' - rt I -E3 I ■.
Svw, of ta Bai Naval tetan fu," flew through the center of the hurricane threatening Puerto Rico and took these photographs from a Privateer "hurricane appraiser" aircraft. In the first photograph,
taken from an altitude of UM feet, the hurricane's outer edge, shows the onslaught of the hurricane. The plane is only 4 feet above the center of the hurricane, whose "eye" is shown in the second photograph. Not the calm spadoo, surrounded by
vtento* that support a high value, which helps the airplane crew to find exactly the center of the storm. Finding the "eye" of the hurricane is the first task of the "hurricane hunters" as they fly home to the dollaturno area. In the third
In the third photograph we see an aector of the storm, where the vtontoa at a speed of 78 miles per hour. When "o oata - view was taken, the Privateer aircraft was flying at 700 plea cobra p nival from the sea, i and about 10 miltea from the center of the storm. (Photo" by Ib Martas.)
- v । । । । । - - 48 3^" - 'Sf' j * J 4- á * t 2-4A-TT I* k \ \ \ \ ír 4' P 1 jr J 4 - r> nA \ \ \ It L\ Ir r I I vi - iuwz-- L II i I I -V * I I I, | l I ' " cd T I N' w i-t - m --- r I § -4 f
map prepared by a Weather Bureau official shows the path of the hurricane up to 11:80 a.m. yesterday when all indications were that the hurricane could affect the eastern and northeastern part of the island. As can be seen in the map, on its first day the hurricane followed a trajectory that, if it continued unchanged, would pass at a considerable distance to the north of the island.
considerable distance to the north of Puerto Blco. On the second day the hurricane changed direction and then it was assumed that it would pass to the south of the island. Yesterday it changed direction again, following for a while a trajectory quite dangerous for the island. In the afternoon it took a more northerly course. - (Weather Bureau Map),
UPR Suspended Classes Yesterday Due to Storm Announcements The Rector Offered Institution Facilities. - Some Public Schools Dispatched in the Afternoon Due to the storm announced by the Weather Bureau, classes at the University of Puerto Rico were suspended yesterday at noon. Dr. Benitez gave the order of suspension by means of a circular to that effect, and informed the students, professors and personnel of the Institution. -
The Rector's circular was as follows: "I wish to give you the latest information available from the Weather Bureau, as well as our interpretation of the possible course of the present atmospheric disturbance. At eleven-thirty this morning, a cyclone of great strength and great extension - winds of 140 miles per hour at the center, with a hurricane radius of 60 miles - had its center located at latitude 17.5 and longitude 63.1 approximately 210 miles southeast of San Juan. It is moving in a west-northwest direction with a speed of 10 to 12 miles per hour. If it continues on its current path, the cyclone could affect the northern and eastern part of Puerto Rico at midnight tonight and early Saturday morning. The current position and speed of travel indicate that there is no danger of hurricane force winds anywhere in Puerto Rico in the next 8 hours. There is a chance that the cyclone will pass north of Puerto Rico when it hits the island in a hurricane form. Shelter Facilities However, it is advisable to take precautions in this area. For this purpose and in order to give students ample time to return to their homes in the metropolitan area and to guard against any possibility, we will suspend our classes for the remainder of today. I repeat my advice to students on the Island. The best safety standards require the elimination of all unnecessary traffic. The highways constitute the greatest risk zones, because of the congestion that naturally occurs on them, the risks of rising rivers, landslides, and the risks of careless driving more frequent than ever in times of excitement. This is particularly so in the event of a flood.
Mary Finocchiaro Says Idea Is to Improve Puerto Rican Morals in New York City On orders from the New York City Department of Instruction, Mary Finocchiaro, Instructor at Columbia University, is conducting a study of Puerto Rican students as part of a plan to improve the conditions of students and their families living in the big city. The North American educator paid a visit to the Capital City Hall, where the Acting Mayor, Josefina Rincón Marrero, provided her with material that will serve as orientation for the work she is carrying out. Mrs. Finocchiaro, who was accompanied by her husband, surgeon Dr. Finocchiaro, supervises 88 schools where thousands of Puerto Ricans study. "The idea of this plan of ours," explained the educator, "is to raise the morale of Puerto Rican students until they realize their importance in the community and that their fellow citizens are proud of them. "To this end," she added, "it is our purpose to fix in their minds that they should not discard the Hispanic culture that identifies them, but to make a fair display of it while adapting to the customs of the new environment". He stated that after between (Contlnued on 1st Page 16, Col. 8)
Disturbance Has Veered Northward
Caution Advised 140 Mile Winds Hit Antigua. - Bulletins Issued According to the bulletin issued yesterday at half past four o'clock < afternoon by the Weather Bureau, the Caribbean hurricane had drifted farther north than expected. "It may not cause vlentoáhu- 1 racanados e.i any part of te i Island," -added the Negociado. "All indications are that the dis- < turbio will probably pass more i distant from Puerto Rico-to the northeast-than previously anticipated." The text of the bulletin of tes cuat y media is as follows: "The center of the hurricane was located by a P-29 plane yesterday tar- 1 of, at 2:30 P M. At that time ej center of 1a storm was at te Latitude 18.3 degrees Nbrte, Longitude 63.3 degrees West, or about 20 miles northwest of te Isla de San Martin. "This is farther North than was reported at 11:30 A. M., and the Indications are that it is more northerly than was reported at 11:30 A. M., and the Indications are that the hurricane will probably pass farther away from Puerto Rico, -to the Northeast- than previously un* ■tlclpted, and may not cause hurricane force winds in any part of the Island. "However, precautions should be followed for tes coastal areas of North and East do Pu"> to Rico, tonight. The next Bulletin would be issued at 5:30 p.m. yesterday"" In the Virgin Islands A special broadcast at 1 p.m. from the Governor's palace in St. Thomas said that the hurricane was expected in the U.S. Virgin Islands late Friday afternoon or early evening. The broadcast contained detailed information for residents of the Virgin Islands. It advised people living at home" of "wood, to take refuge in schools or churches. The broadcast ended with a prayer imploring that the hurricane's path would change and not hit the islands. The Navy's Privateer hurricane fighter plane, which was piloted by Lieutenant Robert Bagby of Annapolis, returned from the hurricane area with only three engines running. (Continued on page 10, Col. 7) EL MUNDO No Circulation Monday, Labor Day Following the custom established every year, EL MUNDO will not circulate next Monday, Labor Day* Our Tuesday edition will be in circulation at the usual time, and will include the official list of the Puerto Rican latería, corresponding to Sunday's draw.