THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Medium cloudy, with a few scattered showers, becoming mostly cloudy with showers and thundershowers during the night. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High temperature, M degrees | low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 19.91 in. mecurie.
NEW YORE, May M. (FU). - This afternoon m reported the following" temperature": New York, U: Chicago, M: Wáshtagton, 74| Miami, M. Forecast"" for* morning in New York and neighboring cities: cloudy with scattered" rain, clearing during the" afternoon" hour. Highest temperature between 79 and 75.
TOMORROW DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered aa second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY MAY 27, 1950
NUMBER 14031 FIVE CENTAVOS
Dismissal For Violence Justified
Striker Should Not Destroy, Threaten, National Labor Board Rules In Container Case WASHINGTON, May 26. (Special to EL MUNDO - The National Labor Relations Board ruled unanimously today that the Porto Rico Container Corporation, of Hato Rey, acted within the Taft Hartley Act in dismissing eighteen strikers who engaged in various acts of violence, threats of force against non-strikers, and destruction of company property. However, the Board majority decided that the same employer did not violate the Taft Hartley Act by deducting from the strikers' last pay envelope the amounts they owed on loans they had received, while allowing the non-strikers to continue to gradually repay the loans they owed. The decisions were made in the case of the Container Corporation and the Unión do Operarlos de la Fábrica de Envases de Cartón, affiliated with the Confederación General de Trabajadores de Puerto Rico. The Board decided that the breakup illegally discharged six of twenty-four strikers, but held that the discharge of the other eighteen was within the law because, during the 1947 strike at the company's plant, they engaged in acts "which exceeded permissible limits." The conduct on the part of the striking diehards, which the Board unanimously found to warrant dismissal, included: 1. Malicious destruction of a padlock on the front gate of the company. 2. - 9. Slapping of a supervisor who was advising the strikers not to interfere with the padlocks on the company's gate. Other Rosones 8. Strikers, armed with clubs, threatened strikers who did not cooperate with the stoppage. Throwing of rocks and thermos bottles at a car taking strikers out of the factory, 5. Slapping of a customer who went to the factory to demand an order, 8. Attacks on two non-strikers on their way to the train. jf, A striker, revolver in overalls, grabbed a striker by the arm, tearing his suit, and 8. Deflation of the tires of a company car as it left the factory, Finding that the evidence showed that each of the eighteen strikers participated in one of the two acts, the Board unanimously rejected the allegations that the company had illegally dismissed them. As to the other six, the Board unanimously decided that the Company unlawfully discharged them because it had no evidence that they engaged in acts justifying discharge. The Board ordered the reinstatement of three of the six, retroactive to the time they offered to return to work. They are Angel Garda. Carlos Rivera and Virgilio Ortlz. The other three were reinstated as soon as the factory reopened. As to the company's action with the strikers' loans, a majority of three members of the Board found that the company had interfered with the employees' right to engage in union activities. In Puerto Rico, the case was with (Continued on page 10, Col. 5)
Sugar Production to be Limited to Individual Quotas, They Believe
The U.S. Department of Agriculture yesterday issued a determination providing the mechanism by which proportionate shares (individual quotas) will be established for Puerto Rico's sugar farms for the 1950-51 crop. Under the provisions of the Sugar Act of 1948, it is specified that those sugar coffee producers who wish to qualify for payment must limit the milling of sugar coffee to an amount not to exceed the proportionate share (individual quota) established for their respective farms. The exact amount to which it will be necessary to limit production will not be announced until shortly before the beginning of the harvest. At the beginning of the current year, approximately 90,000 tons of sugar will be in stock. In view of the fact that for 1949-50 it is estimated that the crop will reach a record level of 1,290,000 tons, raw value, and in view of the restrictions imposed on the marketing of sugar during 1950, it is expected that at the beginning of 1951 there will be a larger surplus than in this year.
The favorable conditions under which more crops are being harvested in other sugar-producing areas tend to indicate that in 1951 the marketing of sugar in Puerto Rico is limited to the basic quotas for export to the mainland market and local consumption stipulated in the Sugar Act, that is, to a total of approximately 1,015,000 tons of sugar. Therefore, it is necessary to restrict the 1950-51 harvest in order to avoid the accumulation of an excessive surplus at the end of the year. The "baso" of a farm is computed using the production on the farm during the base period comprising the 1946*47 to 1949*50 harvests, inclusive. The total obtained by adding the three years of highest production is divided by three and the coefficient obtained is divided by two. To this amount is then added half of the highest production of the farm in any of the basic years. The proportional shares for all farms, except small and new farms, will be determined by the application of the (Continued on page 16, Col. 5)
Will Serve Jail Sentence in Hospital
fl kamm JHb Mrs. Josefina Serrano Colon arrives at the Ponce Municipal Hospital carrying her two-month-old daughter, Julia Esther, in her arms, to remain there as a "rechina" (Photo EL MUNDO).
Judge Decides in Case of Beverage Law Defendant
This Mother of Two Young Children is a Sick Woman - Other Cases in* Ponce Court
PONCE, May 28 (By Miguel Rivera)- A woman who was found guilty of violation of the Beverage Law, will serve the 30-day sentence imposed by the judge, at the Municipal Hospital. Judge Angel Umplerre, who is acting in the District Court in the bolita cases, will be sentenced to 30 days in the Municipal Hospital.
Judge Angel Umplerre, who is acting in the District Court in the bolita and beverage cases, sentenced Josefina Serrano Colón to pay a fine of $100 or serve 30 days in jail, if] found guilty of infraction to the Beverage Law. The defendant, who is a sickly woman in her 20s, appeared in court accompanied by her 80-day-old daughter. When the case was called, the defendant was breastfeeding the child, for which Judge Umplerre called her attention, declaring among other things that "it was a sad spectacle, that there were other places for that, and that the Court was not one of them". Prosecutor Salvador Veray charged the accused that in the Cerro Gordo neighborhood of Villalba, two gallons of rum were seized. The accused was sentenced to a $100 fine or 30 days in jail, and she broke free in the middle of the courtroom. Upon being taken to the District Jail, so that she could begin to extinguish the sentence, the accused went with the minor, refusing to admit her, Mayor Amado Caplfall. The unhappy woman reported that she had no one to leave the child with, as well as another minor of one year of age, that she had left with a neighbor in Villalba. Doctor Fidel Alonso Caifias, from the Tricoche Hospital, examined the accused, finding that she was suffering from anemia due to malnutrition, besides suffering from a hysterical attack. Several District Court officials reported the case to Judge Umplerre, who ordered that, since the defendant was ill, she be confined in the Municipal Hospital while she recovered from her illness. To our questions, the defendant told us that she has two children, the youngest Julia Esther, who is not yet two months old, or Israel, of one sfio. She alleged that her husband, Aurelio Serrano Santiago, passed away about 8 months ago, before Juila Esther was born, and that she has no relatives, earning her living by ironing and washing clothes as well as sewing. Another Case Fuá Acquitted Another beverage case in which the (Continued on page 16, Col. 1)
AA A Studies Water Waste on Island Also Cleans Pipelines. CARLOS NIEVES RIVERA EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority has conducted studies on water waste in about 35 municipalities on the island, according to Rafael Palmer, acting director of the agency. Mr. Palmer informed that since two years ago, The Pitometer Company of New York has been carrying out, under contract with the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority, pizometric studies (on water waste) in the Island's rainwater supply systems. These studies, as he explained, de* (Contlnued on page 16, Coi. 8)
Ponce Cement Leaves 92 Workers Unemployed
Export Suffers a Cola p go Allegedly Confronts European Competition - Stable Local Market For LU!""" SANCHEZ CAPPA , Editor, EL MUNDO A gradually worsening crisis in the foreign cement market, in the countries which Ponce Cement was partly supplying, has obliged the factory to reduce its production, exports and personnel. This was revealed yesterday by Mr. Luis A. Ferré, vice-president of Ir, the company that owns Ponce Cement. It was informed that the mentioned cement factory notified the workers' union that it was necessary to decree the dismissal of a number of workers due to the problem that has arisen in the foreign market where the price of the product has suffered a demoralization mainly due to the competition of European countries that are already exporting. According to the letter sent by the company to the Union, the situation of the demand for cement in the local and foreign market made necessary the reduction of its production and the suspension of a list of workers effective next Thursday. The number of suspended workers is 92. The leaders of the Union went to San Juan yesterday to discuss the matter with the leadership of the CGT (CIO>. of which the Union is a subsidiary. They discussed the problem with senior 'Armando Rlvero, secretary general of the Union. Ferré's opinion For his part, Mr. Ferré. Questioned on the matter, he reported that a "demoralization of the foreign market, especially in Venezuela, motivated by low prices arising from the competition of European producing countries, has caused Ponce Cement to take measures to reduce its personnel, while making the necessary adjustments in maritime transportation costs in order to successfully face the European competition". Sefior Ferré further stated that in the public hearings before the Industrial Committee Number 7 to recommend minimum wage for the Industry, opposing an increase in the cement Industry wage he raised the situation described. He said that the price of cement abroad has dropped considerably. Ponce Cement has reduced its daily production from 25,000 to 20,000 cubes, while on the other hand it has limited its exports, he announced. He added that this demoralizing situation in the price of cement began to be felt at the beginning of the year. It has been gradually worsening, so the company has taken the necessary measures.
He Met Death and Won the Game
wfó MB' I ' HHH I ■ M II ' *4 " 41' ák &
Betty Barblttl, 19 years old, fleeing from a train on the Lackawanna Railroad in Scranton, Fenailvania, fell in front of another moving train. The girl was thrown to the ground between the tracks* and the locomotive and ten cars passed over her body. At
The next day, Thursday, May 25, Betty was feeling fine and smiling at Dr. Henry Bellman at the Pennsylvania State Hospital. (Photo F. A.) -
Senate Committee Passed The Constitution Bill
Berlin Area Is Stage of Great Tension Allies Urge Russia To Cooperate In Task Of Unifying Germany For John McDermott , BERLIN, May 26. (PU)-The Western powers urged Russia to accept 1* the holding of free elections throughout Germany, to guarantee individual liberties throughout the country, to prohl. The Western countries urged Russia to accept the use of secret police and military forces, to cooperate in the establishment of a single economy for the German nation, and to return the factories which they have confiscated in their zone of occupation in Germany. This exhortation, aimed at achieving the unification of Germany, was made in separate notes which the American, British and French High Commissioners sent to their Soviet colleague. The notes were sent to their Soviet colleague General Vassily Ivanovich Chulkov at a time when there is great tension in Berlin over the gigantic meeting which half a million young German Communists propose to hold here under Russian auspices. No one is confident that the Russians will accept these conditions, but some observers think that the notes may lead to an empty conference to discuss the German problem and especially the peace treaty with Germany. Moreover, the notes categorically contradict the accusations of Communist speakers that the Western powers are to blame for the division of Germany. The note* begins: "In reaffirming the determination of its* governments to work together, in cooperation with the German government, and with all like-minded palse*, for the division of Germany, the Communist Party has been able to make a clear and unequivocal case for the division of the country.
PIP Group Raised Case Before Figueres Discussed Current Government and Alleged Island Remains A Colony Fnr Lula Hemándes Aqulno Editor of EL MUNDO A group of leaders of the Partido independent!*:" Puertorriqueño *had an interview with the former president of Costa Rica, "efior José Figueres, expressing their views on the Puerto Rican situation. The interview took place at the Condado Hotel, where General Flguere* is staying with *his e*po "a. and lasted from* nine o'clock in the evening until* three o'clock* in the early morning of Thursday, the 26th of the current day. The Preaident" of the Puerto Rican InderehdentiatR Party, Dr. Gilberto Concepcion de Gracia, spoke "olieitado an interview of the illustrious visitor, who is on the island at the invitation of the Gov" rnador, who is interested in prominent South Americans to observe the work that the government has been doing on the island. Aalatente" General Flguere* granted the interview and it was attended by the President of the PIP, Dr. Concepción de Gracia; Dr. Francisco Suionl, Lic. Marco* Ramírez, Rafael Arjona Slaca, Francisco Suaonl Jr" and Héctor Ramo* Mimoso, Sefior Gabriel Vicente Maura and wife, Sefiora Isabel Vega de Muura, Don Fernando Millán, Sefior Tomás Acosta Ramis, and others. The commission of PIP leaders presented to Mr. Flguere* au* point of view on the Puerto Rican situation, interpreting it from the social, political, administrative and educational points of view. The committee discussed at length the government's program, with emphasis on the government's turnaround in the economic program. Agency" Policy" The committee enlightened the distinguished visitor on a number of aspects demonstrating that the Go* (Continued on page 16. Col. 8)
Senate to Vote on Bills Statehood Hawaii Alaska WASHINGTON, May M.-(PU)--The Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee today agreed to vote on bills* granting statehood to Hawaii and Alaska the week of June 18. Chairman Joseph C. O'Mshoney said committee members discussed both bills informally at a meeting this morning, but took no action on them or on any proposed amendments. Both bills were passed by the House at this session.
By CHARLES SMITH
CHICAGO, May 26. (PU>- The driver of a streetcar which collided with a gasoline truck was arrested today for abandoning Ja es. dinner d*l the disastrous accident" which claimed thirty-three lives. The driver, William Liddell, 29, who escaped with slight injuries from the anoene disaster, was arrested for questioning. He was later released on 1|. bail. Liddell told authorities that the trolley passengers trapped themselves by trying to get all* ■ at once out of the burning streetcar. The trolley derailed and crashed into a heavy gasoline truck, which burst into a downpour of flames that engulfed the trolley, burned pedestrians and set fire to seven nearby buildings. Liddell was arrested as an intensive traffic investigation was launched. Motorist Dies Meanwhile, the Chicago Transit Authority reported that forty-two-year-old motorist Paul Manning, who died in a car accident, was killed in a car accident.
Gene Tierney Lega His Pretty Eyes I J
These are Gene Tierney's light green eyes, photographed during a press conference held by the actress on May 24, at which she revealed that she has bequeathed her* eyes to the Eye Bank of Ib Society for the Restoration of Sight, New York. She said she had nechu this because such an action gives her the assurance that she will continue to be useful after death, and added that she hopes that the publicity given to her bequest will serve as an example to someone else. (Photo F. A.)
Fernós Discusses Tariff* Deduction Asks for Consideration of How Puerto Rico Would Have Been Harmed WASHINGTON, May 26. (PU)E1 Resident Commissioner Antonio Femó* Isérn today asked the federal government to take Puerto Rico into account whenever *it is asked to lower the* tariff* on foreign* goods. Addressing the E*peclal Committee on Reciprocal Information, Fernó* stated that "this committee is acting not *only for the people of the* United*States*, "but also for the people of Puerto Rico, a people facing a somewhat different eco*nomic complex." The Committee e "t is taking up 1a" idea* of the* American* businessman* and the people in ge. neral "work the question of how much this pals should impose of contri, buclone* "over 2,000 to 3,000 import artlcu* los. The United States* *will meet with sixteen other countries* in Torquay, England, in "eptlember, to negotiate a* new* possibly lower* tariff* on these items, "Noting with interest the change from a high American tariff to a low one," Fernós said. "Puerto Rico cannot but be apprehensive lest the impact of this change have undue effects on the local economy. Production Ixwal "The mainland manufacturer," Fernós said, "tat perhaps could accept concessions made to foreign goods" against the* against which Puerto Rico cannot successfully fight. "Besides. Puerto Rico produces some articles of the kind in which the continental manufactures are no longer Interested, such as hand needlework, hand-made* cigar*, hand-made* psja hat*, tiles, snoods, and many hand-decorated articles. "The* concessions on the* items* are* not* limited to the* handmade* items."(Continued on page 10, Col. 4)
33 Passengers Died When Trolley Crashed Into Truck That Blew Up
The trolley control system has had nine accidents' in the past four years. However, only two were attributed to him, and they were minor. Liddell left the scene of the disaster last night, without reporting to the police, as he should have: Investigators were interested in discovering why thirty-two passengers were trapped and charred on the track and unable to escape, but Liddell left when he opened the emergency door. The driver of the gasoline truck was the trlgésimoterconi victim. and about fifty people were injured. Authorities had first feared that additional victims would be found in the burned buildings, but later reported that all occupants escaped. Liddell told the* authority*" that he was at his post in the tra. sera oarte of the streetcar when the collision occurred. He said he was momentarily besieged, but tried to open the emergency doors.(Continued on page 10, Col. 5)
Action Taken Unanimously Amended Section To Require People To Vote On Whether To Accept Statute For WÜÍlañT*DorvWler WASHINGTON, May 26 - (Special to THE WORLD) - The Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee met today in executive session, unanimously approving the bill to allow the people of Puerto Rico to draft and approve their own Constitution. In approving the bill, the Committee made three amendments" to the original version, including: 1. In section doj. the bill now specifically requires that" the law, after its approval by Congress, be submitted to the people of Puerto Rico, "through an insular referendum" for their approval or rejection. The clause stipulating that the Constitution would take effect if Congress did not act on it, ninety days after the President submitted it, was eliminated by the Committee, inserting the following sentence: "The Constitution shall take effect immediately after its approval by Congress. In section five, the Committee eliminated the provision that allowed the President, at the request of the Legislature and the Governor of Puerto Rico, to exempt the Island from any federal laws that were not otherwise applicable. So in this way the bill would take a step backward by removing the President's authority under the present Charter. S" expects that the Committee will receive , a report on the bill later today. and that passage of it . will be virtually automatic. ( The Voters" Committee members who attended the special session and who voted unanimously to' report the measure to the Senate were- . were Chairman Joseph C. O'Mshoney, Democrat. O'Mshoney, Democrat of Wyoming; Senators Clinton P. Anderson, Democrat of New Mexico; Guy Gordon, Republican of Oregon; Zale N. Ecton, Republican of Montana; Arthur V. Watkins, Republican of Utah; Herbert H. Lehman, Democrat of New York, and Glen Taylor, Democrat of Idaho. Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernos Isern, whose version of the bill is in the House Public Lands Committee* awaiting testimony by Representative Vito Marcantonio, American Labor of New York, when the House resumed session on June 5, hailed the Senate committee's action as an indication that the bill will pass. "In addition, the bill has the endorsement of the overwhelming majority of the people of Puerto Rico," Fernós said. - "including the governing party and some minority groups, labor and civic organizations, etc.; and aside from the unquestionable merits of the bill, I believe that the Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee had before it two propositions: ° "First: as the bill neither concedes, precludes or promises Ja independence, does not concede, preclude or promise statehood, or advocate or oppose independence or statehood, it is ii" materlsl to present considerations. And secondly, since according to the terms of the bill itself, it is optional for the people of Puerto Rico to accept or reject the opportunity to use or not use the authority contained in the bill for the adoption of the Constitution, they should be left to decide for themselves in a referendum whether or not they are in favor of the bill. Resolved in the Affirmative
"Apparently both propositions were resolved in the affirmative by the Committee." Questioned about the Committee's amendments, he said that the first amendment, clarifying the wording of the provisions for holding an Island-wide referendum so that the people would accept or reject the bill, was adopted at his suggestion "to ensure that the bill, after its approval by Congress, would go to the people for their approval or rejection. On the second amendment, eliminating the ninety-day provision authorizing the Constitution to take effect if Congress did not act within that period, Fernós said he believed that the experience of Congress with the President's reorganization plans had made that method extremely unpopular. The Reorganization Act authorized putting the plans into effect if they were not cancelled by Congress within ninety days. However. Fernós said he believed that the Committee was not in agreement. (Continued on page 10, Col. 6)