THE MODE
WEATHER PBONORTICON PAMA LA IILA, ROYi - Do clear to pardslment* cloudy with some light and isolated showers, IN HAN JUAN, AYBBi Maximum temperature, II degree" i minimum, M degrees. Haromdlriea pressure at sea level, at 4iM o'clock, ME inches of mercury,
NU1VA YOU, hand IT. (fUt - Bu la larda da lioy ra They reported Ira al* me, M, jrradloMMM Mr" tomorrow an Nuava York and oludada" vaolnaai daa* and vanilBMMO, ron poro namhlo WKMserí S""- the temMralura máa alte, aor-.
MARANA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST ¥ ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ARC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR
XXXI
Entered as Mrand otara matter. Post Office, Ran Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 18, 1950
NUMBER 13963
FIVE CENTS
i St. Patrick's Day Celebration at Veterans Hospital
9Sr MRggHBr I w WSB i
During the celebration of St. Patrick's Day at the veterans' hospital of the same name, actor Juano Hernandez talks with Lucia- no Rodriguez, who, at the three-day event, is a member of the group.
no Rodriguez, who, in the three years he has been hospitalized there, has undergone 24 operations (Photo by EL MUNDO).
-- No Illegal Samples Have Been Taken Yet In Metropolitan Arhb JC¡ Chief of the Sanitation Bureau of the Department of Health, Mr. Juan G. Figueroa, reported yesterday that health inspectors have already taken numerous samples of adulterated coffee in some towns on the Island. According to Mr. Figueroa, the adulteration of the bean, according to the analysis made by the Health Department's laboratories, is carried out on the coffee grounds and fiber of the coffee itself. Another type of adulteration is the mixing of coffee with roasted cereals. Both types of adulteration are being prosecuted. < Mr. Figueroa expressed that the campaign has been intensified, so it is expected that in the course of the month many adulterated samples will be taken, due to the great shortage of coffee. - When asked if any adulterated samples have been taken in San Juan and in the metropolitan area, he said that they have not yet been taken, indicating that the samples that have been adulterated are from other towns on the Island. According to the instructions given by him to the medical officers (Health Inspectors), he stated that the Health Department is aware that adulteration is being carried out late at night by some unscrupulous roasters who are hiding in the shadows at night (Continued on page 14 Col. 8) SOCIALIST J.OS WILL NOT BE CONVENED The President of the Socialist Party, Mr. Bolívar Pv gánUnformed yesterday that he will not convene the Territorial Committee of his Party to determine the action to be taken in relation to the proposed constitution for Puerto Rico. He told Mr. Bolivar Pagan: "It is not necessary. Everything referred to in the draft is amply covered in the current program of the Socialist Party, unanimously approved by the last general convention of the Party, and with the favorable vote of all the members of the present Territorial Committee. That program constitutes the mandate of the socialist people, which could not be varied either by the President of the Party or by resolutions of the Territorial Executive Committee."
ft . Chaplain Blessed an Image of the Saint in Solemn Mass The Feast in Honor of the Patron Saint of Ireland lasted the whole day. Several Personalities Attended By CARLOS NIEVES RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO With a solemn mass and a feast that lasted all day, St. Patrick's Day, patron saint of Ireland, was celebrated yesterday at the hospital of the same name. ♦ ---
The festivity, sponsored by the Ladies Volunteers of the American Red Cross and the Veterans Administration, the agency which governs the hospital, began at nine o'clock this morning with a solemn Mass at which Chaplain Anthony Milford officiated. J* The first act of the ceremony was that of a beautiful image of St. Patrick donated to the hospital chapel by Mrs. Josefa M. Carreras, a devotee of the saint who has made a promise to propagate this devotion in Puerto Rico, ■ Mrs. Carreras attributes to St. Patrick miraculous cures operated on members of her family, especially her mother, who, as she has told her intimates, was cured of a dangerous illness thanks to the prodigious intercession of the saint. Every year Mrs. Carreras distributes among Catholics 2,000 novenas and medals of St. Patrick and sponsors a mass in honor of the saint in the Church of Corozal. This year, she added to her religious duties the donation of the image, which was a pledge of devotion kept for many years in the bosom of the family, to the chapel of San Patricio. After the blessing of the image, Father Milford gave a short sermon on the life of St. Patrick. The religious said that he is one of the greatest saints of the Catholic Church, but that "in Puerto Rico he is almost unknown. In his youth he was taken prisoner by a group of Irishmen who took him as a slave to western Brittany. One day, after planning for a long time, he escaped in a boat in the company of other slaves, arriving soon after in an unpopulated region of eastern France. While walking in search of a village, they arrived at the monastery of Lerlns. One night, Patrick heard in a dream a voice commanding him to return to Ireland. Obeying the voice, Patrick went to study in Auxerre, in the Galla, where he stayed for fourteen years. Once he was ordained a priest, he was sent to Ireland as a missionary, where he preached the gospel with a shamrock (a flower with three leaves joined together) in his hand. With this flower Patrick explained to the Irish the Holy Trinity of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit (the shamrock is the national flower of Ireland since the saint's time). (Continued on p. 14,' Col. 1) ■MMMMMMMMMB- MMMaB.MWlM" < - aMMMMMMMaMB'. ""■> "MM
Action on Two Bills Related to Aspects of Government Reorganization Program Postponed The Senate Special Committee to Study Reorganization Programs was adjourned. The Senate Special Committee studying the government reorganization programs submitted by the Governor to the Legislature agreed to leave pending for consideration those submitted under Nos. 9 and 11. The two bills assign, respectively, the Emergency War Project to the Department of the Interior and the Planning Board to the Office of the Governor. Heracllo Rivera Colón on the action of the House Committee which rejected the program passing the PEG to the Department of the Interior, he stated: "According to the Reorganization Act, action on programs submitted by the Governor must be joint for their rejection. "If the House rejects a program and the Senate does not act on it, the program becomes law. "So if the Senate does not act on the PEG program, it becomes law. Finally, the Chairman of the Senate Special Committee informed that the Report that will accompany all programs to be recommended to the Senate for approval is being prepared and is expected to be submitted within the next ten days.
By JOSX TOMO Graphic Editor EL MUNDO It was very hot in Cludad Trujillo the day the yacht Constellation arrived. Captain Stanley Dashew, his son Skipper, and cameraman Bob Young, entered a soda fountain to satisfy the wishes of the little boy, who was eager for ice cream after a long day at sea. Skipper's problems began when he was confronted with the difficulty of learning the English language because of the mucus. In the middle of the day's confusion, the owner of the American Circus, Jimmy Harrington, entered the premises, and thanks to 41 the situation was cleared up, and Skipper was able to have the ice cream he had been craving. However, the little boy's ice cream was relegated to the category of high school coke, as he had to take the ice cream to get it.
Loíza River Filtration Plant Work Is in its Final Stage
f By RURICO E. RIVERA EL MUNDO Staff Writer Mr. Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, executive director of the Aqueduct and Sewer Authority, told EL MUNDO yesterday in response to this editor's questions that the construction work on the Rio de Lolza filtration plant has been delayed due to the constant rains that have fallen in recent months. Despite this, Mr. Cuevas said that the plant will be operational in the spring, which will begin in a few days. "In fact, he said, "the first tests are already being carried out, and so far they have been satisfactory. The work," he added, "is in its final stage".
Further on, Mr. Cuevas stated that work has already begun on the Rio Grande de Lolza dam, which will take two years to build. He explained that the fact that the construction of this dam has not started before the filtration plant is double the long period of time it takes to complete the entire project. He also said that when construction of the seepage plant began, a temporary pump station was built at the same time. So when the plant starts operating in a few months, the water will be brought to the plant through this pump station. The dam is still under construction (Continued on p. 11 Col. 7).
Two of the Circus Clowns Perform With Skipper Dashew
to learn of the presence of the circus in town. A "Dt VorM" Circus In Skipper's life as a sailor aboard the Constellation, where he was a child, a circus had never been more than a fantasy. (Now he was presented with the opportunity to see a circus in the summer. However, Skipper's joy was short-lived when the circus ended its season in that city. His illusion was cut short when he was ¡imited to a promise from Mr. Harrington to invite him to one of the shows they would offer in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Angustia da la Sapera The trip from Santo Domingo to San Juan was for ol pequeño much longer than usual, and to a certain extent, he continued on page 14, Col.)
Muñoz Says He Acts Within Mandate
Muñoz Marín Denies He Is Committing Puerto Rico to Any Political Status Without the Consent of the People Governor Muñoz Marín today denied that he is committing Puerto Rico to any political status without the consent of the people. Muñoz made the statement when asked to comment on an editorial published by EL MUNDO, to the effect that the Governor was exceeding his authority in his activities in Washington in favor of a Constitution drafted and adopted by Puerto Ricans themselves. "As far as the proposed constituent convention is concerned, the Governor said, "I believe I have a clear mandate, in view of the votes for the Popular Party candidates in the last election, who campaigned on the locally written Constitution as one of the issues. "But completely separate from this," he said, "there remains the fact that the people of Puerto Rico will have an opportunity to decide for themselves whether to favor any specific proposition that affects political status. For the past two weeks, Muñoz has advocated the idea of a locally adopted Constitution, holding conferences with President Truman, other top officials and key members of Congress. He has defended the proposition before two important congressional committees, and Resident Commissioner Fernós Isern has introduced a bill to implement the position. i * Must the People Approve It Muñoz and Fernós have repeatedly reiterated the provision of the bill which requires that if Congress approves the idea of a locally adopted Constitution, nothing can be done unless the people of Puerto Rico also give their approval. And furthermore, any Constitution drafted by a constituent convention must be approved by the people of Puerto Rico. Muñoz has indicated that the idea is to give Puerto Rico complete autonomy in island affairs as a temporary substitute for any other political status. He said this would be a step toward expanding the island's pro-government status. He also explained that he believes there is more freedom and security for a small community under U.S. sovereignty than would be possible with independence, unless guarantees of military protection and economic aid were given, which seem impossible to obtain at the present time. As for statehood, Governor Muñoz has told Congress that Puerto Rico will not be financially able to assume the burden of federal contributions for at least a generation. Continuing their efforts here, Muñoz and Fernos met today with Dillard B. Lasseter, head of the Department of Agriculture's Rural Households Administration. This agenda is responsible for federal assistance for rural housing, which the island government hopes will be available to improve housing conditions in rural Puerto Rico. Muñoz later conferred on sugar issues with Dudley Smith, vice president of the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association and director of its Washington office.
Terrible New Weapons Developed In U.S.
Edgardo L. Colón Edgardo Colón was convicted yesterday by a San Juan District Court Jury of the crime of breach of trust for having appropriated 827,000 dollars of property from the bank where he worked. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Case File Moves to Probation Officer While Defendant Continues Under Previous Bail. Wife Awaits to Accompany Him to Gurabo
By José M. GARCIA CALDERON EL MUNDO Staff Writer
The trial judge in the case against Edgardo L. Colon, who was charged by prosecutor Freyre with felony breach of trust for having stolen $27,000 from the Bank of Ponce, for *1 which he worked as a paymaster, handed down a guilty verdict at
■I""'-, ■ 1 H I- ■ II ■ ■ ■ I Police Occupy Bolita Bank In Yauco Area Pablo Portalatín Was Accused Of Possessing It With $10,000 Bail PONCE, March 17. (By Miguel Rivera)--Pablo Portalatín, of Yauco, was charged by prosecutor Arturo Cintrón Garda with Violation of the Bolita Law, and was sent to the Ponce District Jail because he could not post the $10,000 bail set by the prosecutor. Prosecutor Cintrón García informed EL MUNDO that "the accusation against Portalatín is that on one of the days of the month of March, in Yauco, he operated and exploited as an agent and administrator a ball bank, putting in circulation books, tickets, lists and ball utensils, to play with the last three numbers of the jackpot of the National Lottery of Santo Domingo, a clandestine lottery". The investigation of the case began on Friday, and Portalatín was arrested on Thursday at his residence at 33 Pacheco Street in Yauco. The investigation involved lieutenants Alberto Martínez, Luis M. Pérez, Corporal Ramón Vlrella, detectives Jobo Santiago, (from Mayagüez, providing special services in Ponce); Ezequiel Rivera, Ernesto Colón, Manuel Vallés, Félix A. Matos. José A. Martínez, guards Ellas Lluveras, Mario T. Alomar and Francisco Vázquez. (Continued on page 14 Col. 8).
r three-thirty yesterday afternoon, f The former sa- : cerdotal career student listened to the reading of the | conviction with apparent serenity, । but he was pale as wax. । While the verdict was being read to him, Edgardo Colón looked, without moving his eyelids, at the magistrate. Judge Rodolfo Ramírez Rabón, who presided over the trial, transferred the case file to the probation officer of the San Juan District Court to report within the next fifteen days whether the former paymaster of the Bank of Ponce is eligible to receive the benefits of a suspended sentence. Prosecutor Baldomero Freyre, who was in charge of the indictment against Colón, granted a request from attorney Rafael V. Pérez Marchand, for the convict to remain in provisional liberty under the same bail he provided upon his arrest. Colon's wife greeted him and his father as they left the courthouse. The three showed "signs" of dejection when they met, and quickly boarded a car to go to Gurabo, where they are residing. 1st Accusation Edgardo Colón was charged by prosecutor Freyre for having stolen, according to Ellas G. Lopés and Aristides Lube Sierra, 827,300 of the Bank of Ponce, facts occurred in San Juan, back in August 1949. The accused did not deny having carried out the subtraction of the funds, but alleged in his defense that he acted induced by Elias G. Lopés and Lube Sierra, who according to him used the money exclusively for their benefit. Edgardo Colón offered a full confession of the manner in which the acts charged against him were carried out and maintained while de(Continued on p. 14. Col. 8)
BM^^^^Bl|^^^^9H "dp* ,M ' V V y*. j . £■(1 ".^M* |llil^®rw ' J 9Bt v' BbTj ' f W ¡MhkmHRkOb Jy/l í ♦;■ ¡ -mSt -&r,'\ < ' ♦ * 'á K&&&ÍÍÍÍS - 1 B 9.
Cameraman Bob Young explains to the clowns Farolito and Chalupín and to the hero of the film, Skipper, how the story he proposes to film will unfold.
The film is set to be shot, while ourioBOB's team watches ¡ob aotorea, next to the Padín Building. (Photo EL MUNDO, by Toro).
k - - - Defense Chief Makes Announcement Says Current Weapons Will Be Obsolete. Officials on Alert CHICAGO, March 17. (PU)- Defense Secretary Louis Johnson said today that scientists are studying new methods of warfare that are likely to make all current methods obsolete. In a speech to diners at the St. Patrick's Day Banquet for the Irish Club, Johnson said research and new instruments now dictate what generals and admirals do with their armies, fleets and air forces. The Secretary of the Army gave assurances that Defense officials are working "relentlessly" on a program of scientific research "to keep up with all the new advances" in military weapons, citing as an example President Truman's order for the hydrogen bomb. Constant alertness "You can be sure" that we are equally alert" to the "potentialities inherent" in the fields of "chemical and biological "warfare," as well as "radiography," he said. American scientists, he continued, are "developing new instruments that make all known weapons obsolete. The most modern planes, tanks, guns, and submarines will be made obsolete by the introduction of more efficient substitutes tomorrow," he said. But he did not speak of a substitute for man, who will be the one to handle these weapons. "In fact, there will be even greater demand for personnel trained in the proper handling of the intricate weapons under development, so that they can take full advantage of them. Manpower The Secretary of Defense noted that the United States will never be able to surpass Russia's manpower. But we can compensate for our lack of manpower through technical superiority, through better training in the use of those weapons, and through inspired and resourceful leadership. Johnson also said that the outcome of the so-called cold war with Russia depends in large part on rebuilding the military strength of the U.S. allies in the North Atlantic Defense Pact. - Those allies, he said, share with the United States the "determination to stop the spread of Russian Imperialism and the spread of godless communism." . i
President Ignores Talk With Stalin Port Legion Proposed To Use Telephone - By MERRIMAN SMITH FALL BONE, Florida, March 17. (PU) - President Truman sneered today at an unauthorized plan for him to hold a conversation next week by trans-Atlantic telephone with Soviet Premier Joaef Stalin. On the contrary, the President announced that he will confer by long distance with his "big four" leading legislators in Washington next Monday. He will thus continue, from his vacation quarters, the Monday morning eem "nalea conferences, which are part of the routine in Wáshlngton. White House Secretary Chelee G. Roca said that the White Face is ignoring the proposed conversation between Truman and Stalln "about the world situation. The plan was proposed by the Duncan-Parla post of the American Legion in New York. Legion officials, however, were quick to deny any connection with the idea, stating that the Duncan-Parlia Post has been suspended from the Legion since 1946. The Legion's statement is contained in a telegram sent to President Truman by Ralph W. Gregg, the Legion's national auditor. "The Legion is strongly opposed to the intervention of these amateurs, occultists and publicity buffs in the affairs of the International diplomatic community," the telegram said. The President surprised his entourage by staying in bed until eight o'clock in the morning. Secretary Mathew Connelly, accustomed to seeing the President up at dawn, said he hoped this indicated "a trend." G (Continued on p. It Col. á) *
ation to the
Bill Gives Fomento $2,135,000
Passed in House With Thirteen Others Allocate $124,206 For A Farm In Arecibo. In its session held at noon yesterday, the House of Representatives approved thirteen bills on third reading, one of which assigns $2,135,000 to the Industrial Development Company "to reimburse for certain expenses incurred and for its work programs. P. 557, making the said appropriation, provides for its distribution as follows: acquisition of land, development of the same and construction on said land of buildings for the establishment of industries or the purchase of buildings already constructed, $1,000,000; for expenses for "services, research and activities during the year 1950-51, $600,000. For public relations expenses, $130,000; to reimburse for expenses incurred in the participation of Puerto Rico in the Haiti Industrial Exposition, $20,000; to reimburse for expenses incurred in the Manufacturing Census, $20,000; to reimburse for expenses incurred in the Business Census, $65,000; to defray expenses of the rum advertising campaign in the United States until June 30, 1950, $300,000. The Act provides that the amounts so appropriated shall not be made available to the IFC until July 1, 1950. Other Bills" Other bills of the 13 passed on third reading are as follows: P. of ¡a C. 567, to allocate the amount of $124,206.05 for the construction of a hamlet to house the victims of the Arecibo fire, which occurred this year. *P. S. 422, 'to amend Section 2 of Act 243 of May 1948, in the sense of empowering the Commissioner of the Interior to dedicate part of the appropriation provided by the aforementioned Act "for the acquisition of firefighting equipment and material to be used for the proper operation of the Pumphouse Park" for which the Act provides. P. S. 479, to amend Act 89 of April 1949 in the same terms appropriated in the previous bill; P. S. 477, "to allocate the amount of $12,000 for the acquisition and installation of a radio-receiver and radio-transmitter equipment for the use of the Island Fire Service; P. S. 530, to amend Act 89 of April 1949 in the same terms appropriated in the previous bill; P. S. 477, "to allocate the amount of $12,000 for the acquisition and installation of a radio-receiver and radio-transmitter equipment for the use of the Island Fire Service; P. 530, to appropriate $11,032.05 from general funds and $191.40 from the State Insurance Fund to cover deficiencies incurred by various departments and agencies of the Insular Government during the years 1945-46 and 1947-48. BPP debts P. L. 541, appropriating the amount of $32,408.49 from any funds of the Insular Treasury, for the purpose of paying debts contracted for electric service with the Water Resources Authority by the Departments of the Interior, Education, Health, Justice, Labor, Finance, Agriculture and Commerce, Insular Fire Service, Insular Police. Parks and Recreation Commission, National Guard and Carnegie Library, during the years 1934-35 to 1947-48. P. 558, to appropriate to the Tourism Advisory Board of the IFC the amount of $277,000 to carry out activities and operations to develop and promote the tourist industry in the Island; P. 563, to appropriate to the Board of Vocational Instruction the amount of $14,000 for the construction of agricultural workshops and corrals and for the construction of a new agricultural and commercial center in the Island; P. 564, to appropriate to the Board of Vocational Instru (Continued on p. 14, Col, 6).