THE MONDO
NEW YORK, March 24. (PU) - In the afternoon of today's weather, New York, 48; Chicago, 41; Washington, 80; Miami, 78. Chicago, 41; Washington, 80; Miami, 78., Forecasts for tomorrow: nheary in the morning and sunny in the afternoon, with spring-like temperatures. High, near fifty.
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy, with showers or fair rain. KN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 88 degrees: low, 86 degrees. Sea level barometric pressure at 4:18 p.m., 1888 inches. V
MARANA NEWSPAPER THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 25, 1950
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, flaa Juan. P. R.
Unions Give ______ Endorsement to Boricua Aid in N.Y.
CIO and FAT Unense A PJan O'Dwyer Are Already Preparing Program That Favors More Than 50,000 Laborers By CHARLESGRUTZNER NEW YORK, March 24. <Species of the New York Times)- The Congress of Industrial Organizations" and the American Federation of Labor have joined in a project, backed by Mayor William O'Dwyer, aimed at improving the" (Mielen tea tea condiciona" economic" and lochdea among the" fifty thousand or mi" Puerto Rican" worker" in New York, it was learned yesterday. A committee of six CIO and six FAT leaders, which held its first meeting at City Hall without any publicity, will begin formulating next week a program that will include not only labor problems, but also English and Spanish language instruction, housing assistance and other issues of broader social application. Morris Lushewltz, secretary-treasurer of the CIO Council in New York, and James C. Qulnn, secretary-treasurer of the Central Council of Labor Organizations of the FAT, are co-chairmen of the committee. The project also has the cooperation of the Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division and the Puerto Rico Department of Labor's Employment and Immigration Department. Arthur White, regional director of the Wage and Hour Division, told me that most of the violations of the Wage and Hour Law are committed in factories employing Puerto Rican workers. Our investigations have revealed that Puerto Ricans as a group are being exploited here," said Mr. Whltér. "This is largely due to their language and their high level of information on labor laws. Manuel Cabrones, director of the Puerto Rican employment and migration service in New York, said that the out-of-ordinary wages and working conditions of the" unlonado" are a threat to all labor standards in ostiheludad. "The problem is akin to that caused by the primitive waves of European immigrants. I require immediate attention. Many Puerto Ricans are employed in the local garment industry, in hotels, restaurants, garment factories, the maritime industry and various other branches of labor. Some of the worst exploitation of Puerto Ricans occurred in the garment industry," Mr. White said, "He said that many of the violations of labor laws were found in small factories, some of which gave work to Puerto Rican women to do at home, and some in larger establishments. A typical case," said Mr. White, "is that of a manufacturer of women's hats, which im. - (Continued on p. 18, col. 1)
Muñoz Marín Relapses From Influenza Attack WASHINGTON, March 24. <PU) - Governor Luis Muñoz Marín was again confined to bed. The mild influenza that forced him to stay in bed Tuesday and Wednesday resurfaced again last night, after he had resumed his official business yesterday. The Governor's ailment was said not to be serious. Senate Approved Labor Reorganization Approved UPR Allocation For New Lab. Funds For Justice By £ GALVEZ MATURANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer -The Senate held a brief session yesterday morning, under the presidency of Senator Luis A. Negrón López. Three bills from the House of Representatives and one from the Senate were approved on third reading, and a recess was declared until eleven o'clock at night, in order to comply with the provisions of the law regarding the last day for the filing of bills. The term ended at midnight on Friday night, Authorization A Sierra Among the bills approved on third reading was P. 8. 213, which authorizes the Commissioner of Labor to reorganize the Department. Notwithstanding such authorization, Article 2 of the bill makes it clear that the Commissioner of Labor may not abolish, in whole or in part, the following agencies: Industrial Commission, Minimum Wage Board, Labor Relations Board, Industrial Safety Board, Social Workers Examining Board and Apprenticeship Council. Celestino Triarte voted against this bill because he believed that it contained provisions existing in the recently approved Reorganization Act. P. 183, to allocate to the University of Puerto Rico the amount of $8,120,000 for the construction of a tormology, hydraulics or chemical engineering laboratory at the Colegio do Mayagüez, was approved on third reading. P. 205, authorizing the municipality of Juana Diaz to include in its 1951-1953 Ordinary Budget, appropriations to pay certain debts, was also approved on third reading. House Bills In addition, the Senate approved on third reading the following House Bills: S. P. 167, to amend Section 3 of the "Loy for Auto(Continued on page 16, col. 1)
Lafontaine Cherry Lafontaine Capture Scenario
NUMBER 13970 FIVE CENTS
False Version About Palomilla To Be Investigated
Bill Exempts Temples From Paying Taxes The House of Representatives approved on third reading a bill that provides for amending Subsection (e) of the Puerto Rico Political Code to grant tax exemption "to all buildings, including the equipment and furnishings within the same" that are used exclusively for religious worship and parsonages. The bill, number 547 of the House, also provides that the exemption shall apply as long as the land and building* "are the absolute property of the organization or institution requesting the exemption'' and are not leased or used partially or totally" for the purpose of producing pecuniary benefit "and as long as said institution does not have a pecuniary benefit as its purpose". Est" proContinued on p. 14, Col. 5)
Thousands of citizens of all social classes, thousands of hands of workers and professionals stretched out yesterday morning to snatch from the town criers the extra edition of EL MUNDO, with the details of the capture of La Palomilla, and his return to the island prison, the "pregonero" did not have to shout his morcancla. All" the" hand" they directed you towards it" with greed inualtada, to snatch him" the newspaper. Some' would give a dime' or a nickel' or a penny' and not even ask for change. "The boys" who left with a hundred newspapers from the distribution warehouse would return a few minutes later, sweating and in a great hurry, to look for a new supply. The cries in the street followed one after the other, the criers ran vertiginously, almost unwilling to stop. The customer who did not have the money did not reach the Extfa. From the commercial establishments, from the private and public offices sallan to snatch loe porlódlcoe with dooosperaclón. In some points where someone called, a crowd was crowded to listen to the dramatic account that EL MUNDO offered of the surrender of José Anlbar Gerona Lafontaine and his transfer to the Insular Penitentiary. The machines worked energetically throwing a newspaper brings another in rapid healing, míentrac the acoco of the popular curlocldad gave no respite. Loe hiuchachoc shouted in close porfía eetrindontomonto: "I want a hundred".... Give me docclontoe",.... Give me soon loe mloe.... I'm going to Cont. on page 14, Col, 4)
í M HL jé-,. áKHH
Our correspondent in Ponce, Mr. Miguel Rivera, did his best to obtain the most complete information on the capture of La Palomilla in that eiu¡llad. Here we see him sitting in front of the razor in the office of EL MUNDO in Ponce, interviewing Félix Rivera Go-
dreau, the citizen who gave La Palomilla away after having given her shelter in his house. Rivera Godreau explained in detail all the V*. given by *1 from the moment he met Gerona Lafontaine, until he turned him in to the police. In the photograph in the
center we see Rivera, Godreau when he shows the urgent José Rodrigues the camiaata that he left at Ia Palomilla's house. In front of hL°" the ''-"""where eataha acontado the fugitive when the police arrived to arrest him. On the right is the humble residence of
Rivera CMroau. in the harria flan Antón, "- Poma, "timo "neondlta fUrB d " U (Foteo rte EL MUNDO, por ticvor eiaaeraj **
Believe Was Given: To Help Prisoner Refuses to Mention Who Helped Him - No Federal Action By Jote M. Garría Calderón Editor of EL MUNDO Acting Attorney General Jo0 C. Aponte said yesterday that the case is being investigated by the U.S. District Attorney's Office. Aponte said yesterday that he intends to initiate an investigation in connection with the version given to the authorities and the press by some people who claimed to have been authorized by La Palomilla to negotiate his surrender. ' , - Look in the" page" 12 and 18. r "portaje" excitatives about La Palomilla, published in our extra edition of yesterday. Said Acting Attorney General Aponte that "it is possible that the version was invented to protect the fugitive and avoid his capture." Aponte added that the authorities, as well as the Press and society were mocked by the people who offered to hand over La Palomilla, and assured that he would make a formal Investigation into the matter. Aponte visited the island penitentiary yesterday morning, accompanied by attorneys Guillermo A. Gil Rivera and Angel Vazquez, to take a sworn statement from Jose Anibal Gerena Lafontaine. Gerena Lafontaine was cured and is confined in the infirmary of the Institution, by order of Dr. A. Méndez Polo, who cured the wounds inflicted on him during the escape. In the statement given yesterday before the aforementioned officials. La Palomilla recounts how he managed to escape after cutting with a hacksaw the arrows <le one inch in diameter in his cell. * Gerena Lafontaine said that he never authorized anyone to negotiate his surrender and that he never wrote a letter to anyone to turn him over to the authorities. La Palomilla also assured that he never, while he was on the run, had any weapon, and that it is false that he had a gunfight with Eduardo Marshall. Gerena Lafontaine also declared that he spent three days in a cane field near the prison and that he continuously listened to the movement of the prison population. His stay in the cane field was due to the fact that he was bleeding profusely from a wound inflicted on him by a prison guard, while fleeing after he threw himself out of his cell, since he was afraid that the blood would give him away. The notorious fugitive who had the entire force of the Island Police mobilized in his pursuit was unconcerned as he declined to mention the people who had protected him while he was on the run. He emphatically denied that anyone had provided him with clothing or food on Arecibo or anywhere else and repeatedly maintained that the clothes he wore were purchased with his own money. Notwithstanding his nonchalance and calmness while being questioned, on occasion Gerona (Continued on p. 16, col. 6)
I Da vis 'Expects' Fund To Be Raised To Canteens
Island to Receive $5,000,000 in 1950 Surplus Food Distribution Machinery Ready By BENJAMIN SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer It is very likely that the federal allocation for school lunchroom programs in Puerto Rico will be increased from three million to five million dollars. This was reported yesterday by the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Hjpriano Villlaronga, after communicating with Mr. James P. Da Vis, head of the U.S. Department of the Interior's Territories and Possessions Division. On the other hand, he added, the island runs the risk of losing enormous quantities of food ceded by the Federal Department of Agriculture, unless certain legislation pending in Congress, which would provide for its transportation, is approved. During his visit to the Federal Capital, Commissioner Villlaronga conferred with numerous government officials concerned with Puerto Rican affairs. Another $2 Million As currently drafted in the national School Lunchroom Act, U.S. territories and possessions receive three percent of the total appropriation for these programs. Under that federal statute, Puerto Rico is receiving about $3 million annually for its school cafeterias. If the statute can be amended, as is believed, so that the territories and possessions are put on a parity with the states, Puerto Rico would then receive not less than $85,000,000 each year. The sophor Virgilio Rabaines, representative in Puerto Rico of the federal Department of Agriculture, accompanied Commissioner Vlllaronga in his dealings with this agency, There is an agreement between the Department of Insular Instruction and the Department of Agriculture. There is an agreement between the Department of Insular Instruction and the federal Department of Agriculture to receive federal aid, provided that the following provisions are met on the island: Minimum requirements in the monúa; equality of attention and service for all diners; good storage standards; use of adequate equipment; clear and correct reports and accounts; and others. The federal Department of Agriculture is holding back for free distribution thousands of tons of certain oxcodontos, which could be consumed by school cafeterias. The personnel dedicated to this work in the Department of Instruction is ready to organize the necessary machinery to bring some of these foods to the island. There are, however, certain difficulties which oblige the Department to postpone the plan, according to Commissioner Vlllaronga. In the first place, there is only certainty of getting, for the present and for a limited time, bedding, powdered eggs and potatoes. The Loy leaves to the states and possessions the responsibility of transporting the foodstuffs from the contros in which they are available. (Continued on p. 16, col. 5)
De Castro Inaugurated Governor of Virgin Islands.
■ " V I ■ , - ; Kf ■ 4k...,
Inauguration ceremonies were held yesterday for the first native governor of the Virgin Islands. Above we see the moment when Governor Morris De Castro took the Oath of Office.
Castro took the Oath of Office before U.S. District Judge Herman E. Moore. Below are from left to right: Mrs. Morris de Caatro, the Governor, the Acting Governor of the Virgin Islands, and the Governor of the Virgin Islands.
Vicente Gélgel Polanco; and the President of the Senate of Puerto Rico, Samuel R. Quiñons". (Photos EL MUNDO)
Congressmen Postpone Trip To Puerto Rico House Agriculture Committee To Come In November Me" By. paul" h ar rtson WASHINGTON, March 24. (PU) The House Agriculture Committee today formally voted against making a trip to Puerto Rico during the current session of Congress, but earmarked a trip for next November, shortly after the elections. Committee leaders decided earlier this week to make a trip to Puerto Rico on November 13, when the House is expected to be in recess because of Easter. Today, however, a vote of the group of thirty members showed that most of them could not leave the United States then because of prior political or other commitments. All" members" of the House, who will be up for reelection this year, will be in political campaigns. The Resident Commissioner, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern, said he was deeply sorry that the Committee could not visit Puerto Rico at this session, but that its members would be equally welcome in November. z Fernó" stated that the change in (Continued on n*". 36. col. 6)
Invitation Made by Puerto Ricans To Emigrate to That Territory <","■>- i-- A Borieua Legislative Commission Attended the Ceremony. Official Granted Interview Yesterday EL MUNDO Pnr BKNJAMÍÑ raÑTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Mr. Morris Fundaque De Castro, the first native governor of the Virgin Islands Inaugurated yesterday, said he was "very happy and contented
Senate Subpoenas Eisenhower On Disarmament Asked To Explain Why He Is Concerned About Force Cuts By Warren Duff in WASHINGTON, March 24-(PU)-General Dwight D. Elsenhower was summoned today to explain to an anxious Congress what he meant when he said he is "extremely concerned" about the extent of American disarmament. The Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Military Appropriations decided unanimously to call the General, but did not set a date for his appearance. The decision was made as the two top Air Force officers asked the Subcommittee to meet with U.S. military officers to discuss the issue of disarmament in the United States.
in living with port militiamen, rrlquefloi." In an exclusive interview for EL MUNDO, "1 Governor De Castro had phrases of high praise for the Boricuas and expressed his de. seos that this newspaper should be the bearer of his greetings" 1 "má" -incoro"" for all the puerto, rriquefto people. Mlllare" of natives and people yesterday hailed the first native governor of the Virgin Islands, during the simple, but Imponen, te" ceremony" held" at Emancipation Square, in Carlota Amalla, St. Thomas. In his interview for EL MUNDO, De Castro made an invitation for 1o" Puerto Ricans" to emigrate to the V|rg "ne" Islands, assuring that there will be, under his "dminl". traclon, many opportunities for progress. In his magnificent and vigorous speech, Governor De Castro stated that one of his first actions with the Congress and the President of the United States will be to request that they deal (Continued on pg. 16, col. 7)