THE NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAYi - Medium cloudy, with some showers during the day and at night IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 91 degrees; low, 70 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 a.m., 4:80 p.m., May 8.
NEW YORK, May 8 (FU). - The following temperatures were announced late today: New York, 88; Chicago, Washington, Miami, could not contact the Weather Bureau. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and surrounding cities: partly cloudy, with scattered showers and thundershowers. High temperature: 79.
TOMORROW'S DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered a* second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY MAY 6, 1950
NUMBER 14010 FIVE CENTAVOS
Teachers Held Yesterday Payless Day
April Paycheck Delayed, Classes Suspended To Pay Tribute. - By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Centenar*" de mentaren celebrated Teachers' Day yesterday with great sorrow. They could not collect "u" cheoues corresponding" to the mea of April, one of loa meaea eacolare" longer" del. afío. Dead* five "loa 9,500 teacher" -from Puerto Rico do not see one of those papellton azulea with 1o" con 1o" cuale" the majority has to make tripe and constantly repeat the miracle of loi loaves and lo" pecei. For the first time, however, teachers celebrated their day yesterday, free from the agony of the classroom, even though some superintendents were determined that they should do something about it in the classroom. A malfunction of the machine" of haref 1 checks in the Treasury, according to "e Informed, was In cause for which the teachers" did not collect yesterday. They Honored Themselves As of last night we had received no news of teachers being forced to work yesterday, but we did hear of teachers having to honor themselves. The teachers of the University showed their displeasure yesterday because the authorities of this campus forced them to work, while their other colleagues had the day off, as provided by law. Some of them, according to reports received by this newspaper, intend to raise the case with the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association, so that this organization may take the complaint to the appropriate authorities. The rural teachers of the University City celebrated a luncheon *at a certain club in Bayamón, but paying a fee of 82 each. Those from the urban area were honored individually or in groups, by the different associations of parents and teachers of the locality. In other years the teachers of this district were honored by the Municipality, but "this year zero homage", according to one of them, "because the Mayor's Office does not know what time it is", We know of others who paid $4 per head, "in order to have a good time", some of whom had to borrow the fee that corresponded to them. Events in San Juan A very nice flestecitt was held yesterday at the Department of Instruction in honor of one of the teachers. The staff of the Curriculum Division paid tribute to its director, Miss Carmen Gómez Tejera. Dr. Antonio J. Colorado gave a speech extolling the virtues and work of the honoree. In the Concert Hall of the Escuela Libre de Música de San Juan, a tribute to the teachers of the metropolitan area was offered. The act was offered by the President of the House of Representatives, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl, who presented Professor Jesús Figueroa with his orchestra - of teachers. The Government of the Capital presented a gift to the teachers and Mr. José Rodríguez Olmo spoke to them on behalf of the Administrator of the Government of the Capital. Those of the Labra School were treated to a luncheon in Hato Rey, by the Parent-Teacher Association of the school. In all the schools there were sympathy events in which the students participated. No Classes For the first time teachers were free from the anguish of having to teach classes on the day the Loy granted them to receive the deserved recognition for their work. Credit for this goes to the Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villlaronga, who gave the correct interpretation of the statute, and to the leaders of the Puerto Rico Teachers Association, who during the last few days worked hard to get the former to take this action. "It is of great importance, said Commissioner Villaronga, "that all these acts be exponents of the community's esteem for the teacher and that they serve the purpose of encouraging him in the fulfillment of his delicate mission." The 1939 Act provides that the entire day should be dedicated to acts in which tribute is paid to the nj "e "tro" and that in such acts the students and the community in general should have an active participation. Mr. Jose B. Acevedo, president of the San Juan Local Board, reported at the last minute that -lios visited his" fellow* sick in the Insane Asylum, Sanatorium and other hospitals, and that they brought flowers to the deceased. -
Boricua Cadet Will Meet Truman.
Orlando Antonsantl, commander of the 82nd Civil Air Patrol Wing (right), congratulates Civil Air Patrol cadet student Salvador Rodrigue" of Raldorloty High School, who has been selected to accompany him to the congreaional luncheon to be held in Washington on the 24th of this month. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
Tax Assessment Work Finished Treasurer Says Receipts Will Go to Collectors No Later July 9 The Treasury Department's Assessment Bureau has finished the work of assessment for tax purposes in the 77 municipalities of the island, the Treasurer of Puerto Rico announced yesterday. The appraisal work on which the preparation of the property tax receipts for the year 1950-51 will be based was concluded on March 31 and will allow the receipts for the collection of the tax to be in the hands of the Internal Revenue collectors no later than July 1 of this year. In informing on this matter, the Treasurer clarified that the "values to be used in the" collection" for the year mentioned "have nothing to do with the" new values" that are in the process of being determined by the "Scientific Appraisal Project", currently being carried out. The information authorized by Treasurer Descartes reads as follows: "On March 31, 1950, the work of the Treasury Department's Bureau of Taxation, on which the preparation of property tax receipts for the year 1950-51 will be based, was completed. This is the appraisal work done each year. The appraisal values sor. in almost all Jos the values already previously determined. Those which will be used in the preparation of the receipts for the year 1950-51 have nothing to do with the new values which are in the process of being determined, by the Scientific Appraisal Project which is being carried out throughout the Island, Receipts In Time The valuation of 77 municipality" was already referred by the Appraisal Bureau to the Property Tax Bureau for the preparation of the receipts for the tax rates. The tax rate for 63 municipalities was delivered to the Property Tax Bureau on May 3, 1950 and the tax rate for the remaining 13 municipalities will be delivered in the next few days. In accordance with the Public Code, the property tax receipts must be in the possession of the collectors no later than July 1 of each year. Last year, for the first time in the last ten years, the receipts were collected on the date indicated by law. The prompt action taken by the Property Assessment Bureau this year ensures that the property tax receipts for the 1950-51 fiscal year will be in the hands of the collectors no later than July 1, 1950. This will also make possible increased property tax revenue, especially for municipal governments."
Goes Washington For Congressional LuncheonS. Rodriguez Belongs To Civil Air Patrol - Will Accompany Antonsanti A young Puerto Rican student will shake hands with the man who rules the destinies of the United States and will join him and the American congressmen in the honors at the famous Congressional Luncheon, which is held every year in Washington. Cadet Salvador Rodriguez, a member of the 52nd Civil Air Patrol Wing, who is studying at Baldorloty de Castro High School in San Juan, was selected for his academic merits and efficiency as a cadet, to attend in the company of Colonel Orlando Antonsantl, commander of the 52nd Wing, the Congressional Luncheon, which will be held in Washington on the 25th of this year. The young cadet will remain in Washington for four days, during which time he will have the honor of meeting President Truman and the nation's most prominent congressmen. On his tour of Washington, Cadet Rodriguez will be accompanied by other students who have also been invited to represent the remaining 51st Civil Air Patrol Wing in the state. territory and the U.S. Army. The" cadet" will visit the Naval Academy in Annapolis," the Smithsonian Institute and the Washington Monument. Typhoid Vaccine in Caguas CAGUAS. (By Andrés Martínez García, correspondent) - An education campaign on the prevention of typhoid fever "is being developed in the schools" of this town. Material has been provided to students and teachers, and, in addition, preventive measures are being taken. An agent of the Health Department is reportedly vaccinating the students. In the Aguayo Aldea school, which has about 1,000 students, they are to be vaccinated on the 9th and 15th of this month," according to the notification of the Health Technician of the Department of Education and the Director of the school, Mrs. Mercedes Rivera de Jiménez Martin, to the parents. Vaccinations against typhoid fever have already been carried out in some schools in the rural area. Then it will move on to the population, vaccinating as follows: days 8 and 15, in the Aguayo Aldea school; days 9 and 19 in the José J. Alvarez school; days 11 and 18 in the Lincoln school; days 12 and 19 in the José de Diego school; and on the 22nd in the Muñoz Rivera school.
Expedition Would Name Monte Marahuaca after Muñoz Rivera
PONCE, May 5. (By Miguel Rivera)- If a base is established at the top of Mount Marahuaca, it will be named after Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, governor of Puerto Rico, according to Mr. Ventura Barnés, head of the expedition to the Amazon, sponsored by the University of Puerto Rico. Mr. Barnés said that the mountain that will be baptized with the name Muñoz Marin resembles a gigantic feudal castle, with a height of only eight nul pios above sea level.
the level of the sea. He describes the jungles as "tundras", full of rare animals. The hill is made of stone and other minerals. It has no possible access points, but Mr. Barnés hopes to reach the top. If the top of the hill is reached, Mr. Barnés said that the UPR flag, the U.S. and Venezuelan flags and the New York Explorers Club flag will be planted on it. The technician, Mr. Pe 11 Icier, of the (Continued on pg. 18-Col. I t
10,473 More Are Enumerated In Census
Island Responds To Last Call Population Expected To Fall Short Of 2,200,000. By Rurieo E. River* Editor of EL MUNDO T" total population of Puerto Rico as of May 2 was 2,185,104 inhabitants, having registered in the period of four days," April 29 to May 2, date on which the campaign to enumerate new cases" began, a total of 10,473 persons". This" figure" and those" cited below on housing, agriculture, industry and commerce, are the latest figures given" to the public by the" officials of the Federal Census in Puerto Rico. It was reported that work will now be done on the revision of these figures in order to send a final report of the work done on population to the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín. It is expected that he will receive said report within the next few days. Felix Mejfas and Horacio Royo, director and supervisor, respectively, of the local office of the Federal Bureau of the Census, expressed their belief that Puerto Rico's population will not reach the 2,200,000 figure, or an estimated 20 percent increase over the last decade. s This indicates, as far as we could ascertain, that there are very few people left to be enumerated. Census officials expressed satisfaction with the way the public responded to the enumeration campaign. They also expressed their satisfaction with the way in which the Press, and especially EL MUNDO, had cooperated with the campaign. It is believed that this has been due to the fact that numerous "shantytowns" have been built in the metropolitan area, where numerous "families" have emigrated. As of May 12, Rio Piedras continued to be the second most populated city in Puerto Rico. The figure for that day was VIL222 (inhabitants). Ponce had 100,000 people on the same date. The figures up to May 12 by "-natorial" districts are as follows: San Juan, 559,944; Arecibo, 265,639; Aguadilla. Housing The census of housing as of May 2nd yielded the following information: As in population, during the short period of four days, there was a notable increase in the number of houses enumerated. The final figure to date reached 452,708 dwellings. This figure includes all types of housing, from the residence of the potentate to the humblest casueha of El Fanguito. The number of housing units by senatorial districts is broken down as follows: San Juan, 118,694; Areclba, 53,241; Aguadilla, 57,327; Mayagüez. 56,634; Ponce, 57,041; Guayama, 58,096; Humacao, 51,675. Agricultural Census The latest reports received on the agricultural census were as follows: In total, there are 53,107 farms enumerated as of May 2. The" same are distributed in the senatorial districts" as follows: San Juan. 5,727; Arecibo, 8117; (Continued on p. 18, Col. 4)
U.S. Charges Soviet With Deliberate Lying; Prepares Income Tax Bill A
Treasurer Announces Measure He Believes May Affect All Taxpayers; Will Go to Extraordinary Session There is a possibility that a new income tax bill under study by the Treasury Department may be submitted for consideration at the first extraordinary session of the Legislative Assembly to be held this year. This was reported by the Treasurer. Sol Ia Descartes, when questioned yesterday by reporters in relation to the "progress" of said study. He also added that a tentative draft will be submitted to different sectors of opinion, for the purpose of soliciting strong suggestions that could be considered for incorporation in Ja medida. Mr. Descarte said that the current Income Tax Law dates back to 1925 and has been the subject of so many amendments that it needs to be studied, especially to bring it in line with the economic policy of the present government. Perhaps it will affect ■ All* When asked "if the purposes of the study and reform * of the Law are aimed at liberalizing its dlspoiieione" in terms of exemptions" and other" details" of! payment of the contribution, De "carte" "e limited himself to say that perhaps" it will affect all taxpayers", avoiding to confuse whether it will affect them in a detrimental or in a beneficial sense. There is the purpose of pairing the Insular Law with the federal income tax law by assimilating the best provisions of the latter, with the purpose of perfecting as much as possible the Insular Law. Assemblymen Cruz Ortiz Stella and Francisco L. Mongerrate Anselm| filed a bill in the last regular session of the Legislature, which amended the Income Tax Law by liberalizing its provisions with respect to the exemption for dependents and other matters. The Government, through some of its most prominent representatives, expressed its opposition to any measure aimed at amending the Law in the manner proposed by the aforementioned senators. No Mention of Change" In the press conference held yesterday, De "c "rte" avoided answering categorically if the study being carried out with a view to implementing a law that will probably be quite different from the one currently in force, contemplated the Inclusion of (Continued on Page 18-Col. 6)
Health Commissioner, Dr. Juan A. Pon", stated yesterday that the campaign for the elimination of stray dogs will be intensified next Tuesday, indicating that it has been necessary to provide £3,000 for the same, not counting the cost of elimination in Rio Piedras and other rural areas. He expresses that there is no cause for alarm in relation to hydrophobia, but that "there is reason to take all necessary precautions, to prevent an emergency situation from arising." Dr. Pon" statements are as follows: "With reason to rabies or hydrophobia, there is no cause for alarm but there is reason to take all necessary precautions to prevent an emergency situation from occurring. To that end, the whole community must collaborate. "In general terms, it can be said that there has not been rabies in Puerto Rico for many years. I have news of a case in Coamo about 50 years ago; and in 1932 the presence of the virus was confirmed in a dog and in some other animals.
UN To Hold Seminar In San Juan To Discuss Economic Development Work In Lagging Areas The economic planning seminar to be held in San Juan under the auspices of the United Nations and the Government of Puerto Rico will be attended by experts from the United Nations and seven foreign nations. The seminar, which will begin May 15, will be the second meeting in the field of economic development planning in economically underdeveloped areas to be held under the provisions of a resolution of the United Nations General Assembly. An official note authorized by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Sol L. Descartes, gives an account of the activity, stating that experts from Brazil, Colombia, India, Mexico, Turkey, Turkey, the United States of America, the United States of America and the United States of America will attend this assembly. India, Mexico, Turkey, England, France and Puerto Rico. The information issued by Treasurer Descartes further states: "The conference is an activity of the Stability and Economic Development Division of the United Nations Department of Economic Affairs. The United Nations will be represented at the conference by Mr. Adolfo Dorfman, Assistant Director of the Stability and Economic Development Division; Mr. Hans Singer of the same Division; and Mr. Henry Blnch, Acting Director of the Fiscal Affairs Division of the Department of Economic Affairs. The experts who will participate from different nations are the following: C. Llera" Restrepo, former Minister of Finance and former Minister of National Economy, of Co<Continued on Page 18-Col. 1)
By Enrique Ramires Brsu , (Editor of EL MUNDO) Four employees of the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority were killed yesterday when the car in which they were returning from Mayagüez brushed against a private car at kilometer 16 of the military highway and crashed into a tree and a guardrail, overturning it in a ditch. The victim was Ramón Maídonado, d* 43 aftoi. native and reii. dant* "a Bayamón; Víctor Mateo
Health to Intensify Tuesday Dog Elimination Campaign
DOCTOR JUAN A. TONS bitten by ¿áte. No other proven cases have been reported, and no preventive measures have been taken. In this Health Department many animals are examined every year, which have (Continued on P. 18-Col. 7)
Police Had To Intervene At Lares Assembly Session
It Ratifies Resolution Withdrawing Confidence From Mayor Dicupé, Who Is Asked To Present Books
SAN SEBASTIAN, May 3. (By Antonio Sagardla Jr,)- The police had to intervene in the session of the Lares Municipal Assembly, where a stormy session was held last night, with the participation of supporters of Mayor Ignacio Dlcupé and his opponents, headed by Bernardo Felc
re, -fpor Bernardo Feliciano, president of the Municipal Assembly. Inside and outside the munl. cipa! building cheered the mayor a large number of "u" "Impatizadores. an. tes and during the holding of the session, which was- presided over by Mr. Feliciano, with the attendance of seven assemblymen. The Assembly ratified by majority its previous resolution, withdrawing confidence from Mayor Dícupé, who summoned the same to rectify or ratify said reso. luclón, after having had an interview with e| Secretary General of the Popular Party in San Juan, Mr. Ildefonso Solá Morales. While the President of the Assembly, Mr. Feliciano, alleged that the minutes of the previous minutes were not correct, Mayor Dlcupé began to speak, telling him to shut up. Then tempers were raised and the police and detectives, commanded by District Captain Mar. tlnez and Chief Vázquez Gueits, took several people out of the meeting hall. The Chairman of the Assembly alleged that the Mayor has placed a padlocked gate at the entrance of the Municipality, in order to prevent the Assemblymen from meeting. On motion of Assemblyman Emilio Castro, the Assembly recessed until this evening, ordering the Mayor to submit to the Assembly municipal documents such as the Cash Book, the Minutes Book of the Administrative Meeting and the cancelled checks. The Municipal Treasurer, Mr. । Serrano Irizarry, informed in a loud voice that he would not present the aforementioned books without a previous Audit order, "since he did not trust the Municipal Assembly". The "spirits of the sympathizers of both groups" are so exalted that they fear a "personal encounter". In the morning of yesterday the mayor D|. cupé went to the Capital, in order to inform the leadership of the Partido Popular De. mocrátlco of the existing situation, which is very tense.
They perish in an Accident Four Of the Personnel of Aqueducts
Manzanares, 30 years old, also a native and resident of Bayamón; Lázaro del Valle, resident of Cataño and who conducted the ylp, and Angel Luis Arroyo, a native of Cabo Rojo and resident of Bayamón. Arroyo died while being taken to the Maldonado Sierra Clinic, as did Lazaro del Valle on his way to the District Hospital. Maldonado and Mateo Manzanares died on the spot. The accident occurred at four o'clock in the afternoon, in front of the (Continued on page 13, CoL 5)
Claims Russia Is Obstacle To Peace Note Sent Seems To Close Incident Over Plane Downing WASHINGTON, May 5 (PU>- United" State" accused Russia today of deliberately lying about the incident over the Baltic Sea, and of conducting itself in a manner dangerous to peace. In one of the "strongest" notes of modern times, the State Department charged that Russia has no intention of telling the truth about the April 8 tragedy, in which ten American lives were lost when Soviet fighters shot down an unarmed U.S. naval patrol plane. The note is couched in the rudest terms permitted" by diplomatic tradition. It accused i Ruiia of "indifference to the" le- . ye". customs and opinion of Ja Hut manity." He asserted that Soviet conduct "is a new obstacle to the 1 establishment of harmonious relations between nations." And he asserts that the refusal of the Soviet Government to "comply with the obligations which International law and practice impose upon (the) member" of the family of na'clones" cannot "be reconciled with the" "continued allegations (of that Government) da that it is l devoted to the cause of peace." The effect of the note apparently "will close the incident for the time being. Although warning Russia of "the seriousness" which the American Government attributes to the Soviet con- , ducta "in matters of grave "consequences," the American note did not suggest any additional "effort" to settle the controversy. 1 wing. Russia's repeated false allegations that the unarmed naval plane was a B-29 bomber and that it had violated Soviet territory clearly demonstrated, the American note said, that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics "has no intention of fulfilling its obligations. "It is clearly impossible," the note said, "to resolve this issue as long as the Soviet Government refuses to base its position on the facts of the case. The Soviet Government," the U.S. note said, "must bear responsibility both for the actions of its Air Force and for the manner in which it has dealt with this incident. "The United States Government has to warn the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of the seriousness it attaches to the attitude of the USSR Government in matters of serious consequence". Denies B-29 Out The U.S. memo strongly denied the Soviet contention that a B-29 bomber had violated Soviet territory by exchanging fire with Russian fighter planes. - He again reaffirmed the American version that Soviet fighters shot down an unarmed Naval Patrol Privateer in an attack over the open sea in the Baltic on April 8, killing ten American airmen. The-note stated that it was "apparent that the Soviet version of the ln" cident is not based on fact." The Soviet Union, in a note of April 21, spoke of rejecting as "ab "urd" the American version of the Baltic Incident. The Soviet Union reiterated that a B-29 "flying fortress" is a "superfortress". In "its reply today, the United States" said the Soviet note "obviously shows that the USSR continues to base "its position on an erroneous version" and that it has not made the careful investigation suggested by the United States, which would enable it to correct those errors". The new U.S. note rejected as "completely unfounded" the Soviet claim that the American airmen had "condemned themselves by flagrantly violating the universally accepted principle of international law. The note said that the United States "has no alternative but to conclude that the Government of the USSR has not only failed to comply with the obligations" which international law and practice impose on the family of nations, but has no intention of complying with them. "It is clear that this indlferanete towards the laws," coitumbrss and opinions of you Humsnldsd constitute (Continued on 1a p. 18, col, 5.)
Witness Against Her Husband
Mrs. Betty Grant, whose husband sought to kill her and her two children by planting a bomb in the plane in which they intended to travel, was a witness against her husband, John H. Grant (right), during the hearing of the case in a Los Angeles courtroom. Mrs. Grant, who is a witness for the People, refers to * her husband as "the defendant," and appears behind Grant's attorney, Hayes Mead. (Vote Frena* Associate.) . .t . t .. i -■-'V-'?