THE WN DO
FBONOanCOB OF THE WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND. HOT: - Partly Spitty with isolated showers during the day. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY; ~. High temperature, 85 degrees; low, 74 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4 80 o'clock in the afternoon, "9.07 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK. June 18. (FU). - At Ib afternoon today m reported 1m al* guíente" tomperatuTBe; New York, "i Chicago, 90: Wáahlngton, 70| Miami, 17. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: thunderstorms" in te morning with no aprectehle esmbio in tes temperatures. Highest temperature: korea de M.
THE FIRST AND ONLY DAILY NEWSPAPER IN PORT
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Port Office, San Juan. P. R,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JUNE 17, 1950
NUMBER 14052 FIVE CENTAVOS
False Palomilla Intermediary Found ■ Guilty of a Felony of Fais a Representation.
¿.He asked for Dine/o and Clothes, c Alleging That They Were For t*J. A. Gerena Lafontaine * , i - ■ - For M. Nieven Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO * The "fallo Intermediarlo de La Pa" ' lomilla senderó culpable ante la juez Alma Delgado da] delito de ' filia representación que le Imputaba el Mlnñterio Público, alendo .sentenced to serve 6 mem de 'circe! en la tarde de ayer. Yesterday at 2:00 P. M. was led to the presence of Judge Alma * Delgado the individual Victor Galar- , za Correa, to respond to a crime of false representation that imputed to him by the Special Prosecutor General, Jose C-Aponte. Galarza Carrea was taken duly handcuffed, to the Municipal Court from the Dta- , trlto Jail in San Juan, where he was being held under bail of $2,000 ■ which was set by the prosecutor Aponte himself on April 16 for - the facts* of which he was accused yesterday. As witnesses in the case, the following attended the Court: expert calligrapher Alejandro Torres Grama, of the Neapelado de Documentos Dudosos of the Insular Police: Eduardo González, secretary of the Fifth Chamber of the Municipal Court of San Juan and Martín Acevedo Rosa, (ai Martin Gmgul, alleged injured party in the case). José Anibal Gerena Lafontaine did not attend, although he was listed as a witness for El Pueblo, because he was answering to an accusation before the San Juan District Court, Prosecutor Aponte attended on behalf of the Public Prosecutor's Office.)
The Supreme Court left without effect fourteen sentences for violations of the Beverage Law imposed on the same individual, ordering the case to be returned to the lower court so that the sentencing judge may issue a single sentence. Emiliano Diaz Moure, aliw million. was sentenced by the District Court of Bayamon to serve 8 years and six months in jail for fourteen infractions to the 3*' Drinks Law, consisting in the fact that on June 28, 1940, at the Mininas Wholesale Store in Bayamon, he had in his possession fourteen brass containers containing five gallons of rum each, without the corresponding Internal Revenue stamps affixed to said containers. The fourteen cases were heard together before the lower court, the evidence showing that the defendant drove the rum containers in an automobile he was driving. The court sentenced him to one month in jail in the criminal case filed with the lowest number in the order of filing, to two months in the case next in order of filing, and so progressively, increasing by one month in each of the subsequent cases, up to one year in jail in the twelfth, one year in the thirteenth and one year in the fourteenth, making a total of 8 years and 8 months. The defendant, represented on appeal by attorney César Andréu Ribas, argued in his brief, which covered each and every case, that the lower court erred in] - .dismissing a motion for unlawful search and suppression of evidence, and in acting "out of passion, prejudice and bias in the (Continued on page 15, Col. 4)
lg propagation of communism. The committees killed a proposal to authorize part of the $1,232,500,000 for the Military Assistance Project to send U.S. arms to the most Communist-threatened areas during the next twelve months. The bill specifically provides for the shipment © of arms sales to the Atlantic Pact states and to Greece, Turkey, Iran, the Philippines, and the general area of China. The President has requested permission to use ten percent of the total for any other nation whose well-being is related to the security of the United States. Senators eliminated the general provision, limiting it to European nations. They then postponed a decision on other limitations. As the bill now stands, Mr. Truman could send arms to European countries that have not signed the Atlantic Pact if he found that they would contribute to the preservation of peace in the North Atlantic area. This provision is broad enough to include Spain, although there is no indication that the Adminlstraclóu has plans in the direction. Another amendment was made which hints at the possibility of extending military aid to Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia if his break with the Cominform and Russia might give scope for a conflagration. Countries not Mentioned The President bela authorized to transfer arms to countries not menContinued on page' 18, Col. 7)
ü s ' B BM . w J J L a" * Wl Jb' i bE|' '! I ' ' Y*' I 1 x ri;, fc.ta¿W@k í"- 'r A * Victor Galagarza Correa, the fake Palomilla, is shown here in handcuffs while appearing before the San Juan Municipal Court yesterday. On the right, standing, prosecutor José C. Aponte, seated, is Insular Police Lieutenant Alejandro Torres Orama, an expert on dubious documents, (Photo EL MUNDO).
i Rejects Unlimited Power to Truman to Send Weapons Committees Eliminate General Provision of BilH)e "Aid, Limit it to Countries of Europe l or JOHN L. STEELE WASHINGTON, June 16. (PU)-The Senate Armed Services and Foreign Relations Committees today rejected President Truman's request that he be given unlimited authority to send American armaments to any nation in the world to stop the war.
Géigel Summons Justices of the Peace And Municipal Judges Will Resign Hov the New Law dp the Judiciary. - Will Explain Reform Today morning, beginning at 9:00 a.m., all justices of the peace and municipal court officials, including judges, clerks and bailiffs, will meet with Attorney General Vicente Géigel Polanco. They will meet at the Library of the Department of Justice to discuss the provisions of the new Organic Law of the Judiciary, and to "discuss measures aimed at making the administration of justice more efficient and expeditious," according to Mr. Gétgel Polanco. The Attorney General authorized the following: "The new legislation introduces fundamental changes in the judicial organization of Puerto Rico, by creating courts of an In. sular character, instead of the current courts based on territorial divisions. The Organic Law of the Judiciary creates a Justice of the Peace, a Municipal Court and a Municipal Tribunal. bunal Municipal and a District Court, all of an insular character, with chambers and sections throughout the territory, and with a single territorial division.)
Disaster Inquiry Begins on 26th >
Persuaded in Time Against Suicide lí ■' ■" l r ' 9BV BB hBb * ilFRiií, IImBIF - * % B b B " HKnKr *iHÉiÍ0 ■ ■ ■ b yw* f - K/Inm I James Neal, 32 "å black, of Charleston, West Virginia. who threatened to kill himself spectacularly, finally decided to follow the advice of'police Here he is seen climbing over the railing of the SO-foot-high bridge over the Kanawha City Bridge. A policeman managed to talk him out of jumping in time when Neal was already hanging from the bridge, suspended only by his fingertips. (Associated Press Photo). Justice De Jesus Defends 'Pre-Partisan Journalism Orientation Mission' Supreme Court Held Ninon 4-H (Camp Mayagüez. Another Géigel DÍBcurgo Comparing the rights and duties of citizens and agencies in a democracy and in a dlotadufh. The Presiding Judge of the SuDToma Court of Puerto Rico, attorney An>e! R. de "ófls. affirmed that the Press and radio not only keep us informed of what is happening in Puerto Rico, but also keep us informed of what is happening in the country.
Pantoja Mattei To Be Indicted Again Night Court Clerk Remains Prego. - Luis Muñoz Marin yesterday suspended Julio Pantoja Mattel, former clerk of the Seventh Chamber of the San Juan Municipal Court, known as the Nocturnal Court. New charges will be filed against Pantoja Mattel, according to Deputy District Attorney Jose C. Aponte, who together with "1 prosecutor Francisco Coll Moya is conducting the investigation in the case. . He continues to be detained in the San Juan District Jail, without having been able to provide the bail amounting to 818,000 pesos that was set for him after accusing him of five charges related to embezzlement of public funds. In a cease and desist letter sent yesterday to Pantoja Mattei, the Governor charges him with five counts "of embezzlement of public funds.
The judge was speaking before 250 young people and leaders of the Agricultural Extension Service (4H) organization gathered in a camp in the city of Mayaibfi. Emphasizing the need to maintain the flan, ce of democracy, he said that "it is necessary that the people be kept informed, that they be educated, and to this end, the Government, far from restricting, grants complete freedom to the different vehicles of culture: The Press, the radio, the cinematograph, the free and magazines, "It is such the Importance of 1a Prénsa as a bulwark da tes 1lhartides public", added, "that mían, after a people without opinion is an automaton maro that blindly "or let drag where they want 1le. vario, an educated people, well Infnrmado in their rights, as 1a best guarantee of good government." Allude to Demeeraela Referring to dictatorships, Judge De Jesus told the 4-H youth that in these "there can be no public opinion, since ios eluda, damage can only opine with arre, glo to te will of the dictator. In them the press and radio are so muzzled that most of the time they falsify the truth for propaganda purposes, or at most they publish the half-truth". Related Judge De Jesus te fun.■Continued on te page 18, CoL 1)
JAC Appoints Five-Member Panel Sub-Attorney General Aponte Is Part Of. WASHINGTON, June 18 (PU) - The Civil Aeronautics Board announced today that a five-man panel will begin a formal investigation in San Juan on June 26 into the Atlantic Ocean air disaster that killed 25 Puerto Rican migrant workers. Accident Investigator Van R. O'Brien will chair the investigation. Other members of the panel will be William K. Andrews, director of the CAB's Safety Investigation Bureau, Gordon Mathews of the Washington office, Charles Collar of the CAB's Washington office, and Joaé C. Aponte, island Assistant Attorney General. The Board noted tag part hearings, to be held j "n the auditorium of the Escueta of Tropical Medicine; Investigators will try to discover why a DC-4 of the Westair, of Seattle, failed to conclude its trip to Wilmington, North Carolina, on" the nbehe of June 6. r . ■ The chartered plane, carrying 61 Puerto Rican farm laborers to tea beet farms in the Midwest, crashed into the sea 300 miles off Melbourne, Fla. Coast Guard boats rescued 34 Puerto Ricans* and three crewmen. Twenty-eight Puerto Ricans perished in the disaster. By Benjamín Santana Staff Writer of El. MUNDO . The Federal Civil Aeronautics Board will hold a hearing in Puerto Rico in connection with the Weatalr disaster, according to the Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Potanco. This air disaster occurred almost exactly one year after the Punta Salina air disaster off the coast of Puerto Rico, when another aircraft crashed into the sea, killing 53 Puerto Ricans on that occasion. The Deputy Attorney General and Fieca! José C. Aponte, has been appointed member of the Board of Inquiry, representing the Government of Puerto Rico. Mr. Aponte was also a member of the Board of Investigation that held several hearings in San Juan and New York in connection with the Strata Freight company, owner of the plane crashed in Punta Saline*. As a result of this high level, the Civil Aeronautics Board cancelled Strata Freight's certificate to operate as an airline without a fixed itinerary. It also ordered the cancellation of pilot James Wakefield's license for a period of six months, due to irregularities in the performance of his duties. Repeatedly the Stato Fright has tried to get a new permit to operate between San Juan and Miami, but so far it has not been granted. At the end of the hearings in New York, Attorney Aponte reported that this company would try to resume operations under a name other than Strata Freight Vistea in San Juan. The hearings to understand the Westair. case will be published and will be held in the IConttafla room on page 18. Col. 2)
■ H , BB JJjj BBBiMH vB & I I I fe \ MlBIBBBBBk v. * s Bl wh / A .w ■KSil jH BF' 4 ' b I? wü ■PTr $ ■ i B B MF M < 1BRB i£ -->/ r*- wwl -' ' w ■ - ■ ■ . n a t -K v 5 * ... I i- B Bña% yi ■ W w w JBR B - Br X w ■ . " Mk A ■ B B B B I BjQHK Jp/' /i ¿b bb ymb a ■ y ' Ib ; Mlb;* Jr 1 -- Ik wP 5 K ■ -* R i R Mr* B JAB BB B. .... B TB JB
■/■■■'i KíSii.
In the second term, Jaot Julio Suarez Garrlga. who sentenced the defendant to serve oehn sentences of life imprisonment and two sentences of 1 to 19 years of imprisonment, to be served consecutively. In tereer termine vemaa to Miguel Angel Talen MArqoee".
. Migad Angel Palea Márques (center), convicted of eight counts of first-degree murder and two counts of stunned to life, appears at the reading of the "entonelas escorted by prison guards Miguel Alvares Cordero (left) and Filia Rivera Barrios.
after having aldo "entonelado to spend the rest of "u natural life in prison, saying goodbye to his wife Paulina Dias de Palón. before leaving for the cáree! of La Prinoeea, where he will remain confined until his transfer to the Island Prison is ordered. (Photographs of EL MUNDO, by Luis da Casanav").
Eight Life Sentences for Palou Warehouse Fire Sentences will be of Consecutive Character
Miguel Angel Palou Marques was sentenced yesterday morning to life imprisonment for each of the eight crimes of murder of which he was convicted a few days ago, as a result of the deaths that occurred in the fire of the warehouse of fabrics of his property that was installed in Fortalesa, San Juan. The convict also received other sentences of 1 to 10 years imprisonment for the crime of attempt on life committed against America Lopez de Roe" and Francisco Casanova, the two people who were killed in the fire at Palou's warehouse. Palou listened serenely to the sentences imposed on him by Judge Julio Suarez Gerrige and left the San Juan District Court without showing any emotion. The reading of the sentences took place around 10 a.m., after the hearing was waived to offer evidence in favor of Palou.
The attorneys César Anadeo Ribas and Santos P. Anadeo, attorneys for Palou, waived the plea bargain that had been stipulated before the court, with the statement by Angel Viera Martínez and Baldomcro Freyro, that the convicted man, before the charges that motivated the proceedings against him, had observed good conduct. The sentences against Mifuef Angel Palou Márquez Masas were consecutive. At the time the sentences were handed down, some of the family members of the arson victim were in the courtroom, including Palou's wife, Paulina Días, and other relatives. Palou appeared before Judge Suiroz Garriga accompanied by two prison guards who later transferred him to the Presidio Insular in Río Piedras. The hachea that motivated *1 process against Paiou and his conviction for the crime of murder and attempt on 1* life* occurred o! December 15 of last year.
Passed to the TA Railroad Properties
Federal Court Gives Order to Effect Workers' Corporation to Acquire Major Share for Train Service By Lula Sanchez Cappa/ EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Federal Court yesterday issued a final decree in the railroad company reorganization case, directing the trustee, Mr. I "Commander E. Zegri, to transfer to the Transportation Authority all the properties of the American Railroad Company of Puerto Rico. The decree, signed by Acting Federal Judge A. Cecil Snyder, is the final order in the bankruptcy case filed some time ago by the railroad company, which resulted in the approval of a plan of reorganization of the companies which owned and operated the railroad transportation system in Puerto Rico. The Court's order provides that upon consummation of the transfer of the railroad properties to the TA, the TA will sell to the Puerto Rico Railroad A Transport Company, a corporation organized by the railroad owners, most of said properties for the administration of the train service. The order reads in part as follows: "Within a reasonable time after this decree becomes final, the trustee shall transfer to the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority, in exchange for money received from said Transportation Authority, all real and personal property, as well as all lands, equipment, lines, tracks, utilities and franchises of the debtor corporations. It further provides that after the execution of the transfer, the TA shall transfer to the reorganized Puerto Rico Railroad Transpsport Company that part of the railroad system of the debtor corporations, which extends from kilometer 13.57.0 in. Guaynabo, hartr Aguedllja y Mayaglles, and d" a!U southeastward, to aF IkiTÓm*tro 279-270.50, Including in said Kenta o gransfwrenda all Jas real properties of the debtor corporations located within the aforementioned añtes points." It shall further transfer, in addition, the TA to the company of the workmen toctos "l rolling stock, tracks, Inverttnrios, franchises and other operating rights of the debtor companies, for the price agreed between the two. * The Laborers' organized corporation shall be deemed to be a reorganized company under the Plan of Reorganization and shall assume the liabilities and obligations outstanding against the debtor companies or the trustee by reason of or arising out of the operation of the railroad system. * The receivership of Mr. Zegr! is hereby terminated by this order, and the bond which he gave to act as train master is hereby cancelled, after the bankruptcy proceedings under which the reorganization plan was approved were commenced by the companies holding and administering the receivership. As will be noted, after the trbn companies filed for bankruptcy, mainly due to the claim of several million dollars by the workers for the reorganization plan.)
Sugar Stability To Be Boosted
Thomas To Advocate World Agreement The Problem Will Not Be Discussed At London Meeting. Island Delegate To Attend By William Dorvilller WASHINGTON, June lñ-(Espe-etei for THE WORLD). - American sugar growers are extremely interested in the establishment of sugar at the next meeting of the International Sugar Council in London in June, Senator Elbert D. Tholúas, Democrat of Utah, said today. "American interests are also vital," Thomas added, "not only in the protection of our own sugarcane and sugar cane interests, and those of Puerto Rico and Hawaii, and, in a sense, the Philippines, but also in the maintenance of prosperity in the economies of Western Hemisphere countries such as Cuba." Manubl A. del Valle, president of Eastern Sugar Associates in Puerto Rico, will represent Puerto Rico as an observer. Del Vallo will travel with his wife to London, with a stopover in New York. The meeting will attempt to reach agreement on the maximum amount of sugar that can be produced by all member nations* of the International Sugar Agreement. Sugar interests here have said the conference "is of tremendous importance to Puerto Rico," since it will determine the production of U.S. domestic sugar areas. Representatives of Puerto Rican growers have been active here, holding conferences with the Department of Agriculture and with representatives from other domestic areas. The Department of Agriculture appointed a committee to study the matter and, at a recent meeting here, the views of the Puerto Rican sugar interests, as well as those of the State Department, were made known. José" Ramón Quiñones, president of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, participated in the discussions. - It was pointed out that the basis on which each member nation's production quotas are chosen will greatly determine Puerto Rico's ability to increase its production. For example, if the conference takes as its basis for the United States the Sugar Act of 1948, the Island would be limited to -910,000 tons, and to what it could receive from domestic deficits. (Continued on page 18. Col, 4) Lawsuit Filed Against Westair Yesterday the first actions were filed in Federal Court, in San Juan, against Westair, operator of the plane which crashed off the coast of Florida on June 5 last. The actions were filed by attorney Bolivar Pagan, representing the heirs of nine of the victims who perished in the disaster. The Federal Court marshal yesterday notified the president of the court of these claims (Continued on page 18. Col. 3).