THE
NEW YORK, Aug. 2B. (PU). - At te afternoon today m recorded laa olguiente" temperatures: New York, M; Chicago, 70; Wáahlngton, M; Miami, "8. I'redkrlone": Weather parelalmanta cloudy and continuously hot and humid. Highest temperature, between 80 and 85.
WEATHER FORECAST* FOR WEATHER ■OY: - Medium cloudy that scattered showers at some points ds the lela. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: - High temp. M degrees, minimum. "4 deg. Barometric pressure at sea level. ÜM inches of mercury.
LA MARANA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
.ÑO XXXI
Entered aa aoeond cteae "-**"- Foot Offiea San Juan. F- B
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY AUGUST 26, 1950
NUMBER 14122 FIVE CENTAVOS
War Operacione" South Korean War Operacione" South Korean War Operacione" South Korean War Operacione" South Korean War Operacione" South Korean War Operacione
*°" Á - z ¿ w X>v y M u^'> . ?r* * -' ? aV SOUTH f?> {: " f ' C . . . > .-WCii jRi r0 * M ¿p YW, * U j irty x 1 "*" mpw _&. ur .i c- mip-i *^y' xifíto ' íf"' tvrr**-? 'Si4 "w^I^'"" ,"- y f AAl t ¿ ¿., *8*¿r - W" Chu"""" <"y W.áj fwJl ¿í?Zji kríit'jK rj <ox SOUTH -/ *a w v * - "---- IQ , sutmti Mim 50 T.m eontra*taquea da Im out". American" and aurcoteanaa, continued during H U d. ago "te. trying da block loe ' * *- norcoreaaoa do Infiltrate the grumo do "u fuersa do M.80a hombreo (A) through a breach in the "Unea" of detenta north of raogá. In *1 ""L loe communist" regrouped a fuena de do" dlvleloneo <B) in the area do Chinjú. North of Pohang (O, the South Korean thrust continued. although the North Koreans presented a strong rmlatencla near Longgi. (Photo by Frenan Aooclada.)
Johnson Requests Authority 1 I ' To Call Up 5,000 Doctors I z Submits to Congress a Bill Including i Other Professionals Also. Army To Raise Quotas For" FRAN K' ELEAZER WASHINGTON, Aug. 28. (FU)- Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson today asked Congress for authority to recruit physicians, dentists and other professionals and scientists" up to the age of 45 ( ■ - 1
year" The first to be called would be the five mi! modics who escaped the military sound, after being educated under the Gobler. not during the second world war. dML But the bill empowers President Truman to order the special enrollment and entry of men "in any necessary categories, professional, technical, dental, with specialties, and occupational. Tnhnson submitted the bill, to which Congress has promised "a sympathetic reception, while Army sources predict that future calls for! service in the -hipo of ages 19 to 25 arto" will be greater than the quotas of te, 000 mena monthly for September and October. It was said that "-'enrollments will reach as high as 100,000 men monthly. Johnson called for quick action on the draft doctor". to stop the need to call up "substantial numbers of reserve officers who, he said served long and loyally in the last war. He said the legislation has the full backing of President Truman. The bill affects doctors and other specialists "who have not yet reached loe 45 years of age." These will serve up to 21 months." the same period prescribed pa. re loa conscripts in the 1" to 25 altea group. Four Priorities The bill establishes four prio. rldities for income. In the first group are those who received medical or dental training at Government expense, but served less than 90 days. In the same group are men deferred from n. elutamlent during World War II to take medical or dental training on their own. ~ The second group consists of men trained during World War II who were in active service for more than 90 days but less than 21 months. The third group would consist of other physicians and dentists who have not had military service, but who are. (Continued on Page 18 CoL 1)
PIP Leaders To Discuss The Constitution : ";' < ] Leaders Of Municipal Committees Meet Tomorrow In Arecibo The Puerto Rican Independence Party will prelminarily । its position regarding congressional law number 800. which granted < Puerto Rico the right to adopt: < its own conititution, marta na do- ' mingo in Arecibo. ¡ i An assembly ti* the presidents. < 5 secretaries and treasurers of all the municipal committees together with the Board of Directors of the PIP will be held at the Radio Club i of that city so that the < leaders of. the collectivity in the Island may express themselves on the various elections to be held soon in relation to the law on the constitution. The assembly will begin at 9:00 a.m. and will be presided over by Dr. Gilberto Conceprión de Gracia, president of the PIP. It will be a meeting of a consultative nature, in which it is expected that the municipal leaders of the grouping will make their agreements recommending to the central leadership the attitude that the PIP should adopt with respect to the. Specifically, the assembly will consider plans related to the registration of new elec- 1 . toree to be held on November 4 and 5, next, and the opinion of the leaders of the party on the participation or not of this in the elections and the referendum and other elections to be held in accordance with the law, according to Dr. Concepción do Gra- . rie. At the conclusion of the meeting, and in the evening, at nine o'clock, the PIP will host a rally to be held at the Paseo Victor Rojas in Arecibo, with the participation of the PIP. Arecibo, with the participation of the UI (Continued on Page IR CoL 7).
Petition to Dewey to Pardon a Boricua
By Mkhael J. O'Neill WASHINGTON, Aug. 25,-íPU)-Governor Thomas E. Dewey was asked to pardon a Puerto Rican laborer who is extinguishing a lengthy sentence for the passionate murder of his common-law wife. Resident Commissioner Femó" Isern, representing Puerto Rico in Congress, asked Dewey to accept a petition for clemency signed by the Mayor and 200 citizens of Vega Baja. The petition alleges that Jose Rosarte Negron had no legal assistance when he pleaded guilty to a second-degree murder charge and was sentenced to serve 25 years in prison on October 30, 2001. He adds that there is sufficient evidence that the court-appointed attorney was able to provide him with legal assistance after the imposition of the sentence.
He adds that there is sufficient evidence that the court-appointed attorney could have been present after the sentence was imposed." In his letter to Dewey, Fernos said he was "impressed by this petition" and "trusts" you will give it every consideration." The bullet that cut short the life of Inocencia Rivera Colón ended a long and turbulent idyll, which was raracterized by rifias. arguments, separations, poverty and jealousy, ábaadona Concubino According to the petition. Inocencia abandoned Rosario while they were living in New York because he could not support her. It adds that Rosario wandered the city for a while, then bought a gun and went to the home of the rival who had taken her place. There, says the petition. Rotarlo ma. I took his eoncubins. For about twenty-four hours he roamed the streets of New York. Then (Continued on Page IR CoL T)
Americans Isolate Three Thousand Reds By Conquering Hill at Hyonpung; Government Seizes Railroads
Order Goes into Effect From 5 P. M. Tomorrow
1 ■ - ['ruinan Prevents Strike Declared by Unions. WASHINGTON, Aug. 25.-(PU)-President Truman ordered the seizure of the railroads as of" five o'clock Sunday afternoon, to prevent the national railroad strike, announced for" six o'clock Monday morning. (WASHINGTON-1 m two "railroad m. m. teeth" aanoelarom their national strike, thirty minute" after 1a order of President Traman seizing the railroads. The strike was indefinitely postponed, and union leaders hailed the seizure as a tremendous victory for the workers. |The employers did not make any comment). The strike has been declared by two unions and was supposed to begin Monday morning. But the unions have been requesting that the government occupy those railroads, which ensures that there will be no work stoppage. The executive order signed today puts the railroads under Army control. President Tramen gave to the public a statement in which he asked all railroad workers not to abandon their work. It is certain that the railroad unions will comply with the President's order and continue their work. The strike has been declared by the brotherhood of railroad employees and conductors. The strike would have paralyzed all major railroads in the United States. Order "Kaenctel* The President said that the order placing the railroads under Army control is essential to national defense and security, public health and the general public welfare." He expressed that the Government must take every step" poslbleé "to ensure to the extent possible, continuous and uninterrupted trsnsporie service." He told the President that "in view of the strike situation we face, government occupation is imperative for the protection of our citizens. The executive order stipulates that existing contracts between the railroads and the two unions will continue in effect until an agreement is reached between the companies and labor representatives. The order for the occupation of the railroads was issued after many days of fruitless talks between the labor representatives and the companies. The negotiations took place at the White House, hosted by John R. Steelman, an expert in conciliatory negotiations in labor disputes and a collaborator of President Truman in this matter. Nominal Control Sertor Truman authorized Army m ctotary Frank Pace. Jr., to delegate the operation of the railroads to the prlvads" "to the maximum extent possible." That means military control will be largely nominal. There is no indication" of qu" tes tropsB sd (Continued on te Fag. 18, Col. 1).
* The plans of Compartía Telefónica for the installation of a microwave system between San Juan and Ponce are well under way," according to José D. Domlngu "*, vice president and general manager of Compartía, who reported yesterday. The installation of this new overland system will allow the expansion of the number of long distance circuits between San Juan and Ponce and this in turn will make it possible to supply additional long distance circuits to other important cities of the Island, such as Mayagüez, Arecibo, Guayama, Aguirre and Aguadilla. A study of the terrain between the San Juan and Ponce cludsdes is being carried out by an expert in this equipment, who has come to Puerto Rico at the request of the Porto Rico Telephone Company. This expert is being assisted by Compartía engineers here. Among the problems that need to be solved for the success of the microwave system are the appropriate heights of the terminal towers, the provision of emergency thermal equipment, the height of the repeater towers and the supply of adequate motive power. Mr. Dominguez explained that Telefonica engineers will be chartering a plane at any moment to make an aerial survey of the higher towers between San Juan and Ponce, as part of the work that is intended to determine the appropriate height of the repeater towers and the supply of adequate motive power.
Korean Casualties Reach 17
So far there have been 17 Puerto Rican casualties in the Korean war, according to the Army's San Juan office. The Puerto Rican casualties are Francisco Tstevera, of Cabo Rojo, son of husband and wife Ricsrdo Tstevera, who was seriously wounded; Jaime O. Domenech, of Aibonito, son of Ramona B. Domenech, missing in action; Jaime O. Domenech, of Aibonito, son of Ramona B. Domenech, missing in action. Domenech, missing in action; Private First Class Miguel A. Rodrigues, of Csmuy, son of Luis Rodriguez, slightly wounded. Private Juan Pagán, of Sabana Grande, husband of Emelins M. Pagán, slightly wounded; private first class Guillermo Sotomayor, of Aguadilla, son of Virginia Hidalgo, slightly wounded; Jacinto M. Reinos", of Puerta de Tierra, son of Juan M. Reinóse, seriously wounded: José A. Pérez, of Utuado, son of Edelmira Páre", slightly wounded: Private Juan F. Cortés, of San Sebastián, son of Vicenta Cardona, seriously wounded; second lieutenant Joe A. Font, of Ssnturce, son of Wiilism A. Pont, slightly wounded: bait Samuel Rodrigues López, of Mayaguez, son of Paute López, missing in action: Private Enoc do Jesús, of Cayey, son of Eladio de Jesús, died at sea as a result of an accidental wound from a cardboard ball.
1st Lt. Elmy L. Matta, of Santurc"< husband of Margot H. Matte, killed in action; Pvt. Mario V. Sánchez, of Caguas, son of Sabino Vázquez Padilla, slightly wounded; Pvt. Vicente Escobar Torres, of Ponce, son of Matilda Torre", missing; Pvt. Angel Ortiz Medina, of Aibonito, son of Carmen Medina, slightly wounded; Héctor M. B. Herrero, of Arecibo, son of América Véle", slightly wounded; and Franci "co Ramo" Rivar", of Aibonito, son of Trinidad Rivera, missing in action. The last Puerto Rican soldiers to appear in the list were reported yesterday by the Department of the Army in Puerto Rico. It was said that Private First Class Francisco Ramos Rivera, of Aibonito, was missing in action on July 20. Beto was the son of Trinidad Rivera, whose address is Apartado 813, Aibonito. The other one corresponds to PFC Hector M. B. Herrero, from Aroch bo. This soldier was slightly wounded in combat. He is the son of doAa América Véle", resident in Central Loo Carteo, Arecibo. The incident occurred on the 13th of last year. i
r * Wf ■Eb * SBK k zWImISI jibU The reneral i. Uwton Colllna (anointed to the franU). ral Walton H. Walker (liqulerda). commander of the
Kl General J. lawton Coillne (front), Walton H. Walker (left), commander-in-chief of the KJercJt Chief of Staff, riding in an Eighth Army Jeep; and Major General Farle E. Partridge, commander of the Fifth Air Force, during his recent visit to the war front. The driver is Sgt. George A. Belton, who is in the rear seat are Lt. Gen. I*eevllle, Luielana. (Photo by Prenta Aooclada.)
i Puerto Rico Will Have All Its Surplus Sugar New Increase in National Consumption Estimate Will Allow Shipment to U.S. of 150,545 Tona. 1 By J. M. GARCIA CALDERON - Editor, EL MUNDO By virtue of a new increase in the estimate of sugar consumption for the current year, made by Secretary of Agriculture Charlea H. Brannan last Wednesday, the U.S. sugar industry will be able to ship 150,545 tons of sugar to the United States. Brannan on Wednesday, Puerto Rico will be able to freely sell and ship to the open market all of its surplus sugar accumulated in the 1949 and 1949 harvests.
i the 1949 and 1950 harvests. The surplus sugars accumulated on the Island, corresponding to . The surplus sugars accumulated on the Island, corresponding to the last two harvests, amounted to 150,545 tons. If this quantity of sugar were sold at the current market price, it would produce a total of 519,000XXX). The news of the action taken by Secretary Brannan caused a real jublló in the Island sugar circuios ', and also in the workers' circles. The sale of Puerto Rico's surplus sugar means that the 1951 harvest will begin with clean sugar warehouses, which will translate into greater work opportunities for the workers and greater income for the people of the island," said yesterday Juan B. García Méndez, executive vice-president of the Sugar Producers Association, commenting on Secretary Brannan's action. ' Geatlon of te APA । The APA. as is known, speaks is- । been managing that al- . administrative action be taken by the L autorldadee of Wáshlnglon to i qu" tete could get out of your accumulated surplus azó- . cares, which , threatened to be unable to sell- . se, with shortening the zafra and 1a pro- . duction of Insular sugar in 1951. "The U.S. Secretary of Agriculture made his second increase in sugar consumption estimates for 1950 on August 23. These consumption numbers were originally set by Secretary Brennan at 7,500,000 tons of sugar. The first increase of 350,000 tons raised consumption to 7,850,000 (Continued on Page 18, Col, 8).
Sen. Méndez Signs Attitude to Leave Office Remains Determined to Resign Senator Bernardo Méndez, of . AguadlHa. continues to insist on the irrevocability of his resignation as a member of the Insular Senate, in spite of the efforts that have been made to persuade him to abandon his attitude. In spite of the fact that Méndez has been practically detached from the Upper House for four months, he continues to perform his duties as leader of the Popular Party in the Aguadilla district. He continues to make representations to high-ranking government officials in favor of public works projects and other matters related to his district. Yesterday he visited the Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Poi Unco, with whom he discussed problems > of the Aguadilla district, according to Méndez. - On dlatlnlns occasions, Senator Méndez has been called to La ' Fortaleza by the Governor, together with other officials, to discuss problems of the said district. (Continued on Page 16, Col. 5)
Defendant Arouses Compassion In Court, Escapes Punishment
By J. M. Garete Calderon Reactor of EL MUNDO The ftecates, - like any man engaged in any other office than that of prosecuting the law, - are apt to feel compassion for the weak and unfortunate, especially in those cases in which the enslavement or cruelty would be against Christian sentiments. Evidence of this trial was offered yesterday by prosecutor Obdulio Bauzá, when he asked Judge Angel M. Umplerre of the San Juan District Court of Puerto Rico to be benevolent and pardon an anchorman, not ill with tuberculosis and with a grimy appearance, who was appearing before the magistrate to answer to a contempt of court charge. The defendant, Juan Parta Rivera, against whom a complaint was filed (Continued on Page 18, CoL ?)
JUAN PERA RIVERA
(aiiiiu nists In Advance For Pohang Allies Now Receive For Their Counteroffensive Much War Equipment For FRANK TREMAINE TOKYO, Saturday, August 28. <PU)-The famous American Second rt" Infantry Division, entering the Korean war as a unit for the first time, has begun an elimination campaign against the last North Korean bridgehead on the Naktong River, dispatches" received from the front reported today. The Indian Head division seized a hill at the Hyonpung bridgehead, 13 miles southwest of Taegu, and virtually isolated 3,100 enemy troops there, while the North Koreans repulsed the Americans and South Koreans at two Bectors north of Taegu and carried out an attack on the city from the northeast. On the southern front, the North Koreans continued to mass men for an offensive against the supply port of Pusan and on the east coast forced the South Koreans to withdraw more than a mile away during a strong counterattack. In addition to the new attack from the northeast, directed against the road leading to Tegu from the east, the North Koreans were regrouping men for a new attack against the city from the north. Numerous dispatches said that the North Koreans entertained the idea that they could seize the city now. The Second Division's attack was intended to eliminate the dangerous and latent threat from the southwest, placing men for action at every other point. The Second Division, which had made history in two wartime 'wars,' went into action with more men, more tanks, more armored vehicles and more weapons of any kind than any American unit in Korea had ever had. Then in an aerial and artillery bombardment, the "first" infantrymen, 25 percent of them World War II veterans, attacked the Hyonpung bridgehead at noon yesterday. Behind sub tanks they crossed an open area, seized a village, and tempted the edge of a 1,340-foot hill, which gave them mastery of the enemy supply and escape route. Dispatches said that the North Koreans were almost surrounded. The Second Infante* ria arrived in Korea on July 31 from Fort Lewl", Washington. Units of this division were called up to support other United Nations forces in the critical battles at the bend of the Naktong River on the "si" coast. But it never fought in this war as a division until yesterday. The North Koreans, with a curtain of murderous fire, repulsed a combined North American-Bud Korean attack on the Kunwl road, 15 miles north of Taegu Eyer. The enemy also repulsed a South Korean attempt to capture Mount Pugy", 600-pole, 7 miles east and 15 miles north-east-northeast of Taegú, which was lost Thursday night. General Douglas MacArthur announced that 2 miles north-northeast of Taegú, the South Koreans were in "heavy contact" with a force of 6,000 North Koreans attacking down the main Ulong-Slnn-yong-Yongchon road. He admitted a "slight penetration" by the enemy in the vicinity of ChongnoDong. Red MacArthur also said that air scouts had reported a large concentration of enemy troops, equipment and vehicles near Haang, 12 and a half miles north-northwest of Taegu. -On the Kunwl-Taegu road. But there is every indication that the North Koreans will tighten their gigantic attack to take Taegou, along the road that enters the city on the east side. The North Koreans now attacking on the road were spearheads of two divisions now in that sector, said a spokesman for Ma'arthur. Intelligence officials said there was a strong push in that area when the enemy began shifting its forces eastward at the beginning of this week. The only real action on the front yesterday came when one" (Continued on page 18, Col. 1).
Government Seeks Coffee Abroad
Muñoz Against Speculation Reorganization Supply Office*. - PRACO For RUR1CO E. RIVERA Editor, EL MUNDO The Government of Puerto RIm" is conducting g/attenea in Haiti. Sants Dornins® and the U.S., in order to obtain enough coffee to give a death blow to the coffee black market which exists at present in Puerto Rico. Tx>" Reports obtained yesterday, as expressed by Mr. Ramón Colón Torres, Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, are to the effect that the coffee problem can be solved by acquiring sufficient supplies abroad. To such effects, he said that yesterday in Fortaleza the coffee problem and the prevailing situation in the Island were discussed. He expressed that the setter Arturo Roque, who was at the conference. He reported on his efforts in the Dominican Republic regarding the possible purchase of Domlnlcabo coffee there. Felix Mellas was also present. It is known that Suministros has been making representations about sources of supply of Dominican coffee. It is understood, however, that in all these meetings, government officials have encountered difficulty in obtaining coffee on the world market. There is the impression that there is very little coffee from the last harvest on the world market. Coffee Price Regarding the price of coffee, Mr. Colon Torree said that "it is understood that the presumption is that the price of coffee will be raised to the level of the world price or one that is very close to it". In this way, he indicated, the affluence of the product will be assured and aglotlsmo will be avoided. On the other hand, he said that the meeting in Fortaleza yesterday did not discuss the Coffee Law, which has been submitted to the Treasury for its implementation. According to Mr. Coton Torres, the law is to provide funds for the rehabilitation programs of 1a xona catetelera. He also said that the black market and hoarding law has not yet been signed by the Governor. In addition to the government reorganization of the General Supply Administration, which by virtue of the reorganization law has been transferred to the jurisdiction of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, Supply will be reorganized again, this time in its internal structure. Questioned on this matter. *Mr. Colon Torree stated that "there will be a reorganization of Supply. The idea is to make this agency, negotiated or whatever it will be called in the future, a more efficient and dynamic organism, which will always have at hand all the basic information on markets, so that when an emergency situation arises, it can act with the necessary speed". According to the information, the purpose of the reorganization is, among other things, to have a good market analysis and statistics service. It will also proceed to review the entire inspection system which, according to Commissioner Colón Torres, "has so far not rendered the service expected from ÓT*. Work on the internal supply organization is progressing, according to Acting Administrator Félix Mejías. To date, several conversations have been held with the Office of Personnel and Budget (continued on page 18).
Boricu