THE WORLD DAILY TOMORROW
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy with only a few showers mostly over the mountains. Moderate easterly winds. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, M degrees: low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., M.M inches of mercarlo.
NEW YORK. July 7. (FU)-Today's late afternoon reported temperature loe algulentee": New York 80; Chicago 82; Washington ": Miami 86. Forecast for tomorrow: hot, ala eambloe apreelablee in tea temperatures.
THE FIRST AND ONLY DAILY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 8, 1950
NUMBER 14073
FIVE CENTS
E. U. Orders Recruitment
r((Saríwon i '£>(17///%)
Columns of the North Korean invading army (black arrow) broke through the Sojong-Ohechon defense line (solid black line) in their continuous advance southward. A red column reached Chonan (A) forcing the American troops to retreat 50 miles south of Seoul. The red furrow collided with Communist armed units* at Chungju (B). The broken line
Group Drivers Say They Speculate With Tires Sellers Allegation Is That Unjustified Demand Exists In Plaza By Luis "Anches Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer An unusual and "unjustified" demand from the consuming public for automobile tires has arisen throughout Puerto Rico, several San Juan tire dealers revealed yesterday. On the other hand, the Puerto Rico Drivers Association yesterday issued a public protest "because tire dealers are speculating with tires by hiding them and selling them at black market prices." The abnormal situation in the island's automobile tire market has arisen during the last few days, and after the start of hostilities in Korea, it was revealed. First, Mr. Alberto E. Sanchez, secretary general of the Drivers Association, reported late yesterday that several commissions of public car drivers have visited the organization's headquarters to complain that it is making it extremely difficult for them to acquire tires for their vehicles. The drivers have alleged that the vendors "are denying them tires, and selling them at exorbitant prices, giving as an example that tires that were sold at 818 are now being sold at 825 and even 835. Mr. Sanchez indicated that the Association intends to raise the problem with Governor Muftoz Marin, so that he may intercede with the General Administration of Supplies so that it may take action to avoid the black market of tires," he pointed out that "the Caguas Bus Lino has informed the Association of the possibility of paralyzing the bus service, due to the difficulty it is facing in obtaining tires for its vehicles; and that said company approached a tire manufacturing firm on the mainland, which informed it that there is nothing abnormal in the production and sale of tires to it.dls(Continued on Page 14, CoL 2)
Dr. Susoni Invites Muñoz Marín To Debate On The Constitution
In a public letter addressed to Governor Lula Muñoz Marin by independence leader Dr. Francisco M. Susoni invites him to hold a debate on the proposed Constitution. Stressing the right of the people to know all angles of the issue and not those of a single political party, Dr. Susoni states: "Mr. Luis Muftoz Marin: Press information tells us that you are preparing to orient the Puerto Rican people on the meaning and scope of the law under which you consider that this people will have the power to draft their own constitution. This information was authorized by you on the occasion of the commemoration of the historic date
commemorating the historical date on which the thirteen North American colonies conquered their Integral freedom; act with which the Puerto Rican Independence Party is in solidarity, as it is in solidarity with all those acts in which homage is paid to the noble emancipatory efforts of all the peoples of the world, while claiming equal solidarity, in immanent Christian justice, for the emancipatory aspiration of the people of Puerto Rico,
Our people are about to approve or reject, in the referendum already announced by the Government (Continued on Page 14, CoL 8)
sLy. dosm Sta Oí Jopan 11 Sman among fe gCb. ""n _ STATUTE MUÍs -
from Chechon to the eastern coast, marks I* poaible line of detenaa. The town of Utehln (O, reportedly, was recaptured by the South Korns, when some Red units broke through to a point * 25 miles south of that town. The area in black marks the approximate territory so far held by the Invaders in South Korea. (Associated Press photo.)
Russia Calls Blockade of Korea New Act of Aggression. Contends U.S. Note Holding It Responsible for Damage to Soviet Interests.
MOSCOW, July 7 (PU)-Russia today described the U.S. naval blockade of the Korean coast as illegal. It says it is a "new act of aggression" incompatible with the United Nations Charter. The Soviet note, dated July 6, discloses the reply to the U.S. note of July 4 and warns that Russia "will consider the U.S. Government as a "new act of aggression" incompatible with the United Nations Charter.
President Requests $260,000,000 More From Congress By Louis Cassels WASHINGTON, July 7,-(Pm.-I President Truman has asked Congress for an appropriation of $8260,000,000 to build special atomic plants for the production in the United States of super hydrogen bombs. Well-informed sources said that most of the money will be used in the manufacture of new atomic batteries to make tritium, the form of hydrogen denseu which is expected to be the main explosive element in the hydrogen bomb. This means that atomic energy experts are now reasonably confident that the new weapon will be effective. It would have been possible to manufacture quantities of tritium for experimental purposes - enough to test one or more bombs - by altering current Iss (Continued on pAg. 14. col. 7).
responsible for all consequences of this act and for all damage" to the interests of the Soviet Union, which may be caused by reason of the carrying out of the said blockade." The American note of July 4 speaks Informed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the imposition of the blockade in "compliance with the resolution of the Security Council." In reply, the Ministry said textually that "the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union acknowledges receipt of the Embassy's note of July 4 and, in compliance with the instructions of the Soviet Government, has the honor to inform you of the following: "In the aforementioned note the Embassy informs you that the President of the United States has ordered the naval blockade of the Korean coast, alluding to the resolution of the Security Council on the Korean question. "The Soviet Government, in reply to the message of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Trlgve Lie, of June 29, has already declared that the above-mentioned resolution of the Council on Korea was adopted in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and has no legal force. Consequently, it cannot serve as a legal basis for the (Continued on page 14. Col. 1)
Holy Year Trip
Monsignor Davis To Celebrate Mass To Impart Papal Blessing
By Carlos Nitros Rivoro Editor of EL MUNDO "The economic situation in Spain is difficult, but on the other hand, there is evidence of a great spiritual resurgence, especially among the male element," said yesterday the Bishop of the Diocese of San Juan, Monsignor Jaime Podro Davia, in relation to his recent Holy Year pilgrimage to Rome, during which he owed a Mass in Epaphia, France and Portugal. Bishop Da vi o, who together with Bishop Eduerdo Mee Manua presided over a large group of Puerto Rican pilgrims, delivered to His Holiness Pius XII a letter from Governor Mufioz Marin in which he offered him official and personal greetings. The letter was delivered to the Supreme Pontiff by Bishop Davis at a private audience he granted to the two dignitaries of the Church of Puerto Rico.
The letter was delivered to the Supreme Pontiff by Bishop Davis at a private audience he granted to the two dignitaries of the Church of Puerto Rico. - Mass In Cathedral The Pope sent a "very affectionate and paternal" blessing to Puerto Rico, and instructed Bishop Davie to celebrate a Mass in the Cathedral to impart this apostolic blessing to the Diocese of San Juan. The Bishop said that as soon as possible, he will celebrate this act, which will be previously announced. On the other hand, during his brief stay in Madrid, on his way to Rome, Monsignor Davie visited General Franco, who, according to the words of the dignitary of the Church, received him with affection and simplicity, and on the sidelines of his visit to Franco, Moneofior declared: "In spite of the harsh treatment that the Caudillo and the people of the two nations have received, neither he nor the people have any arrogance. 14, CoL jB)
MR' . \ " N y WJg LOUIS JOHNSON Cabinet Surveyed Situation Johnson Intimated There Would Be Important Announcement Later By FRED MULLEN WASHINGTON, July 7. (PU)President Truman and his Cabinet reviewed the Korean war for a full hour today, and Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson told the meeting that "there may be important news later." There was immediate speculation that he may be referring to General MacArthur's announcement that four ships, believed to be submarines, were attacked by U.S. B-29 Mipcftforts in the Chlnnampo Area. The Marine* said that no official report of the incident has been received here in Washington, but that Russian submarines may be operating in that area. 4In Army spokesman reported that the North Korean "invasore" armies were moving tanks, troops and artillery to the front for a major assault on the new U.S. defense line south of Pyongtaek. Military observers expected the U.S. forces to push back the Reds in their first major clash. So far, only numbers (Continued on page 14. Col. 6) Selecti vo Here Ready to Recruit The Puerto Rico Selective Service State Headquarters announced yesterday that it still has no official word on the draft, Colonel Rafael Gimenez de la Rosa, director of the Selective Service on the island, told EL MUNDO yesterday. The first news reached the Selective Service headquarters in Puerto Rico was reported by EL MUN. DO as soon as the information sent by the United Press was received by the teletype service. In accordance with the second section of the Selective Service Act of 1948, which was recently extended by law, the authorized strength for active service in the Armed Forces is as follows: Army, 800,037 men; Navy, 666,832 men;" (Continued on PAg. 14, CoL 3).
Eliminate Attack On U.S. Lines.
Aircraft Stopped Tank and Infantry Force In Northern Chonan By FRANK~TREMAINE TOKYO, liberated, July 8. (PU)-U.S. Air Force planes, in a deadly blow against a communist infantry and tank force, destroyed a new threat to the U.S. line on the western front of Korea. . LAKE SUCCESS. New York, July 7. (PU) - The United Nations Security Council today authorized the United States to appoint General Douglas MacArthur supreme commander of the allied forces in Korea. WITH THE U.S. TROOPS ON THE KOREAN FRONT, "Abado, Julio X. (PU4 - The U.S. Artillery shelled the North Korean positions far above Chonan Friday night, after a flank movement by the Communist infantry forced the Americans to make a sharp retreat from their forward positions, which they had occupied earlier in the day. However, there has been no large-scale action and no significant change in the fighting front. The northern infantry, which first advanced against the tanks, forced the Americans to withdraw under a curtain of artillery fire in the early hours of Friday night, and the Communist corps is believed to have been stopped several miles to the north by Allied aerial tanks and blown bridges. Bombers, jet fighters, Mustangs and other aircraft attacked a force of forty North Korean tanks and a thousand infantrymen on their way to attack the U.S. line north of Chonin, thirty-six miles northwest of Taejon. The result, said a spokesman for U.S. headquarters in Korea, was "very gratlflcating". The communists were stopped, the Chonan line stabilized. "We believe the Air Force stopped them," the spokesman said. "We can report a slight improvement in the general situation." Fifth Air Force planes attacked a group of North Korean tanks and a convoy of troops moving south from Suwon. Observers at the front directed the attack by radio. It was reported that the combined strike was the largest and most significant in the two weeks of the Korean war. In addition to the twin-engine Mus*, fang and F-51 Mustangs, the Americans sent in B-28 bombers and F-80 jet fighters. The midnight statement from General Douglas MacArthur, authorized at headquarters here, said that the bombers set fire to numerous tanks. Fighters destroyed or damaged others. "We strafed a lot of soldiers," MacArthur said. The big attack took its toll, MacArthur observed. "We lost two superfortresses and the crews of two returning aircraft sustained injuries...three F-51s are missing." But the U.S. Air Force provided vitally needed help at a critical time. Without specifically addressing the present battle line in the U.S. Army sector, the spokesman said the North Koreans had succeeded in getting their tanks across the Ansong River, U miles north of Chonan. Demolition groups reportedly tried to blow up the bridges across the river, but evidently did not succeed completely. There is Little Action United Press dispatches received from the front said there was little Infantry action on the outskirts of Chonan. This would put the North Korean advance line dangerously close to Taejon, temporary code of the government of the (Continued on PAg, A CoL O
♦ - Crisis Predicted In Bayamon Hospital
Doctors Object to System Work Others in Health Wait for Appeal to Appeal to the Courts Pnr Luis Hernández Aquino EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Bayamón District Hospital is facing a crisis in its medical services, due to the fact that some of the "professionals who work in said Institution have resigned. The resignations are due to the new working conditions imposed by the Health Commissioner and the Personnel Office. As reported to this editor, Dr. Angel Cestero, head of the Gynecology Department of the Bayamon District Hospital, resigned a few days ago. Dr. Fernando Asenclo, head of the Surgery Department, is on leave for two months and next October he will be absent for a year in order to carry out studies under the Federal Government's veterans' plan. Recently Dr. Asenrlo received an Invitation from the University of Liverpool to undertake studies at that Institution, aspe, claimants Investlgacione" on Intestinal surgery. Two years ago Dr. Asando attended the annual meeting of the Congress of Surgeons held in Rome, where he met colleagues from the University of Liverpool, pool. Other Problems The Head of the Department of Pediatrics, Dr. Basora Defllló, is currently giving va. rations. She recently wrote a short letter to the Commissioner of Health informing him that she would appeal her case for renewed working conditions to the Personnel Office. However, it has also been reported by people close to Dr. Basora Deflllo that he intends to resign. Another physician who is on vacation is Dr. David Rodríguez, thoracic surgeon at the Bayamón District Hospital, who is said to be possibly resigning from this position. It has been reported by a reputable professional that the Bayamon District Hospital will gradually reduce the service it provides to 17 towns in the district. He said that super-specialized work will be done at the Institution, especially brain surgery and cancer, in combination with the new Medical School of Puerto Rico. The aforementioned prof. slonal also argued that while there has been a desire to increase the salaries of the doctors, the medicine budget of the Bayamon District Hospital is only 822,000, which does not compare very favorably with the medicine budget of the Bayamon Municipal Hospital, which has instead the sum of 827,000,000. Meanwhile, the Health Department is taking the pertinent measures to put an end to the crisis in the Aguadilla District Hospital, which was denounced by the Mayor of that town, Mr. Cabán Peña. This was reported yesterday by Dr. Euripides Silva, assistant of the Insu. Division (Continued on page 14. Col. 6).
Households Plan To Begin August
Expenditure in Two Years Will Be 850,000,000,000 AIH l'fcoyecta Construí" As 15,000 Units, Works For Capital For RURICO E. RIVERA Editor d* EL MUNDO The gigantic housing program to be carried out by the Puerto Rico Homes Authorities under the provisions of the Homes Act of 1949, -which reaches psr" the first" do" arto" dol" program of "the" to the "uma of 850,000,000--will be Initiated at mid" dol next me" of August. César Cordero Dávíla, executive director of the Island Homes Authority. He said that as far as the agency he heads is concerned, auctions for the first project will be held in mid-August 1950. The total program for the first two years includes the construction of 11,000 units, a figure considered conservative since it can be increased by the Federal Authorities. The cost per unit is estimated at about 84,600, The construction boom is of such a nature, it has been stated, that it is estimated that over 16,000 laborers will be employed in the construction of these housing units. The money K "er invested in wages for this number of laborers is estimated at 825,000,000. Under Construction Fnrii 1951 According to Colonel César Cordero Dávlla. it is expected that by July 1951, all the projects of the AutotMad Insular de Hogares, to which a total of 4,500 units have been assigned so far for the first two years of the program, will be under construction. It is also estimated that the other Home Authorities of the Municipalities of San Juan, Ponce and Mayagüez will have initiated the other 4,500 units by the same date. To these 9,000 units must be added the 2,000 units that, as a conservative estimate, are expected to be obtained out of the 81,000 units to be built in small towns, "In total, the estimate is 11,000 units for the first two years. The "Housing Authority believes that of the 81,000 non-farm-housing units, i.e., those in sparsely populated municipalities, more than the estimated 2,000 units will be built. If this is achieved, the number of housing units to be built for the first two years of the program would reach more than 15,000 units. 900 Vnldadra As far as the Insular Homes Authority is concerned, the largest project so far designed is for a hamlet to be built in the San José neighborhood in Hato Rey, which will consist of 900 housing units. The other projects will be built depending on the site and the demand for rentals among the low-income people living in the slums of Puerto Rico. Mr. Cordero DAvIla "signs that his agency, as soon as the auctions are held, will have no less than thirteen" monthly projects under construction throughout the Island, Se con- i (Continued on page 14, Col. 4) i
' s ' r s MHÜBÍ , i giu, . ||l nli liimi'i VU "id iJÍBHHHBHBHHHHHHIHBHBHBM Momonto* in which the Bishop of San Juan, Monsignor Pedro Jaime Davle, was interviewed by our colleague Corlo* Nieve* Rivera (Photo EL MUNDO,). ,
i Covers Young People From 19 to 25 Years old "i
Call* Will Depend On Volunteer Number. Selectmen's Meeting WASHINGTOÑTjünó 7. (PU) - l The Defense Department today ordered the recruitment of eludadnno" between ins ages 19 to 25 years" to serve in the armed forces. A brief statement said qu* voluntary enlistments will be accepted- ' rio". At the end of 1" World War II, the services" abandoned the policy of accepting voluntary" enlistments, calling for all" eludo* . harm" n to serve compulsorily. . Below is the text of the announcement. "To cope with " the situation in Korea, on the recommendation of the 4<"1 ■ Combined Chiefs of Staff, as agreed upon by the Secretaries of the Army, Navy and Air Force, and with the approval of the President of the Republic, the Army, Navy and Air Force have been authorized to exceed the global budget maximums for military personnel. "This measure is the first step in bringing their full operational power to the Army, Navy and Air Force units which are to be used in the Korean operation, to provide them with additional auxiliary services and support, and to replace units to be sent to Korea. "The use d-1 compulsory military serVirio has been authorized. Voluntary enlistments will also be accepted." Emergency Meeting Director L e w I s R. Hershcy, of the Selective Service System, called his staff together for an emergency conference to implement the Defense Department's order on the draft. While the announcement was being made at the Pentagon, President Truman outlined the program to a group of military leaders convened for a meeting at the White House. The Defense Department did not indicate how many men it needs to strengthen the Army, Navy and Air Force. . The fresh services now have a force of about 1,370,000. Congress, in "appropriating money for the services, limited Jos spending on the Armed Forces. President Truman has authorized the "ervile" to exceed the limit. The number of voluntary enlistments will determine the men who will be called up. Johnson Orders WASHINGTON, July 7 (PU) - Secretary of Defense Loula Johnson today ordered the draft of men from 19 to 25 years of age to provide reinforcements for Americans fighting in the Korean war. Those called to active duty will possibly be subject to 2 months of service. Acting with the approval of President Truman and Combined Chiefs of Staff Johnson, said that young men registered under the newly extended peacetime Selective Service Act will be called up to augment the Army, Navy and Air Force to their full authorized strength. The Director of the Selective Service, < Lewis B. Hershey, immediately summoned an emergency meeting of his aides to put the Selective Service machinery into full steam. ] vo. The exact number will depend on the success of the armed services in recruiting volunteers, officials said. J These will continue to alendo accepted," '
Until nhorn, they have been meeting ' all their needs with volunteers. They added that the renewal of the military draft, which has been in use since January 1949, will oblige the armed services to call up for active duty some Reserve officers to train recruits. The procedure for recalling them to active duty was not announced. The only restriction on the number of men to be drafted is the congressional limit of 2,005,885 for the combined strength of the armed services. As of April 30, the combined strength was 1,485,000. That is 547,000 monkeys out of the authorized strength and I mean that number could be recruited. Senator Millard E. Tydlnga, Democrat of Maryland, chairman of the Senate Armed Service Committee, informed of the action at an emergency conference at the White House, said there was no time to raise the limit. Indeed, the Congreao dló to the" "ervlclo" money "oficíente to maintain 639,000 hmobre" in ol Army; 499,000 in the Navy; and 417,000 in the Air Force. However, the number could increase at any time. The Navy and Air Force do not want to recruit, and 1" major delivery of the men called Iran to the Army, which still needs M,(Continued on page 14, CoL 8).