THE WNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy during the day today and tonight, with scattered showers" on the north coast tonight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, M degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.84 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Nov. 10.(PU)_ In the afternoon today you recorded the" following temperature!" New York, 58; Chicago, 80; Wá "hington, M; Miami, 79. Forecast*": Weather deapeja" Jado for the most part. Continuously cold, Highest temperature between the" 40 degree".
LA MASANA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
ANNUAL XXXI
Entered a" second class mattar, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1950 NUMBER 14198
FIVE CENTS
The Corpse of Griselio Torresola Was Buried Avei
" X ' I" ■ i w ■ I U - BY ■▼ B .. n - I ; x,.b - i A '■' , > * * XK X? %l^^B'J ' ' \ te- -' > * XK - ,■ ■ ' ; ; ; .'-F j - B|BB||> .\J%X ■ Kk- Bb --"^^^Bg l -y ■/. ■
Doña Roaallna Roura Viuda de TnrrcNoln weeps at the body of her son in Fiinornrla Buxcdn, Santurce. Ia accompanied "u daughter Angelina Torre.
"oln "le Platet and Mr. Rafael Páre" Roura, who brought the corpse "le mu cousin dmtdc New York. (Photo EL MUNDO, by Luis "le Cnacnnvo).
Mongoose Is Proven to Carry Rabies Gives Positive Result After Biting Calf In Cíales Population By Lula Hernández Aquino Editor of EL M-UNDO The Biological Laboratory of the Department of Health has definitively proven that the manreata or Puerto Rican squirrel is a transmitter of rabies /in Puerto Rico. The work done to reach this conclusion took some "emana". For the first time, a squirrel or mangostn has given evidence that it is the cause of hydrophobia, a disease that had not occurred in Puerto Rico for about 10 years. The first cases of canine rabies began to appear here a few months ago. The initial case occurred in the Monacillos do Rio Piedras neighborhood and then cases of the disease appeared in different parts of the island, until now ten of them have been confirmed, and three others are suspected. However, the first cases of canine rabies were centralized in the northeastern and central part of the island, and to date have not occurred in the west or south of the island, except for a single case in the rural area of Poner. The mongoose that has tested positive for rabies, according to Dr. Abel de Juan, chief of the Department of Health's Epidemiology Bureau, comes from the town of Cíales. It was in the Cinlltos neighborhood of this town that on October 10, farmer José Colón Joy informed the Department of Health that he had found a mongoose attached to a calf he owned, which was holding the animal tightly with its teeth and did not want to get rid of it. The" health authorities,,once Mr. Colón Joy had removed the animal,,took it to the Health Department's Biological Laboratory,,where the corresponding analyses were made. One of the experiments consisted of inoculating guinea pigs with matter from the mongoose brain. The guinea pigs were kept alive in their cages for about 15 days, after which they appeared dead, proving that their death was due to the inoculation and that the mongoose had died of rabies. The Human Rabies Until the coot has not been produced in the Island, which is officially soup, a case of human rabies, but the conditions of this disease are such, among the animals, especially the dogs, that the federal scientific investigator who studied the problem of rabies in Puerto Rico, doctor Ernest Tlerkel, expressed before leaving for the United States, that "the Island is located on a powder keg in this matter of rabies". It is the opinion of officials of the Department of Health that it will be necessary to make a strong campaign against the mongoose, an animal imported into the island at an unknown date, and which has reproduced prolifically. The mongoose was brought to the island to fight rats and snakes, but it has become so deadly that it has taken to fighting chickens and other domestic fowl, with which it maintains itself. Control Measures The American Public Health Association recommends five general rabies control measures. Detention and Examination (Continued on page 16, Col. 4)
Only Mother, Relatives, Police Attended Funerals
R. Perez Roura Declares They Tried To Involve Him In Attempt On President Trunnih's Life
By Rurlco K. Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO
Five hours after having arrived on the island, the body of Griselio Torresol" was buried quickly, and without any religious service, in the Capital's cemetery. The burial took place yesterday at 12:45 noon. 4 - - - -
They accompanied the coffin only, mind "his mother, Mrs. Rosalina Rouro Vda, of Torresola; "his sister, Mrs. Angelina Torresola da Platet: Mr. Alfredo Platet, his brother-in-law: and Mr. Rafael A. Perez Roura, cousin of Grl "ello, and who tr "Jn e| e| corpse to Puerto Rico. In addition to the relatives, the funeral procession was composed of a large number of detectives and some representatives of the Press. There were no dramatic scenes at the moment of burying in grave number 142 of the municipal cemetery, the corpse of the man who, together with Oscar Collazo, recently made an attempt on President Truman's life. Moments before the bronze box containing Torresole's remains was lowered into the grave, his cousin, Rafael Perez Roura, "addressed the woman asking her if she wanted to see her son for the last time. With a clipped voice and crying, Torresole's elderly mother answered in the negative, expressing, "No, I don't want to see him anymore". The box was lowered to the bottom of the grave amidst a great silence. Around one o'clock in the morning the dreamer Rosullna Roura Vda. do Torresola arrived at the chapel of the Buxeda Funeral Home, who was in charge of Torresola's funeral. Together with "his daughter, the "chora Angelina Torresola do Platet, "or they knelt in front of the coffin, and they cried copiously. The cousin do Torresola. Rafael A. - Continued on page 10, Col. 8
Penal Guard Still Not Reinforced Group Raises Protest And Insists Increase in Personnel Be Authorized The penal guard of the Penitenciarla Insular has not been reinforced after the mass escape last October 28, "although the guard has suffered a decrease of eleven during the last few weeks. A commission of nine of them visited our editorial office to insist that "I must not authorize them to carry weapons when they are off duty, claiming that their lives are in danger. They say that of the 112 escaped from the Penitentiary on October 28th, there are still 14 on the street--among these are Antonio Cotto Corroa and Gregorio Lebrón. The prison guards also complain that they are working 12-hour shifts and that yesterday many of them had to refuse to serve two shifts in a row because they were "exhausted". In the vicinity of the prison, however, there are national guards on standby for any emergency. Merina En Guardia Do lo" 57 guards, corporals and "ar(Continued on page 16, Col. 4)
Chamber Repudiates Mendez After 8-Hour Impasse
Muñoz Endorses Repudiation Says It Does Not Respond To Controversy Speaker But Government Attacks By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL EL MUNDO Staff Writer Governor Muñoz Marín yesterday expressed his personal support for the resolution passed by the Legislative Assembly, declaring the president of the CGT (CIO), Mr. Tomás Méndez MeJIas, persona non grata. The Governor stated that both the Legislature in approving and he did not support the aforementioned resolution, did not take into account in any way whatsoever the controversy between Mr. Méndez MeJías and the President of the CGT. I" controversy between Mr. Méndez and the Speaker of the House, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl. The Governor attended a few weeks ago a meeting in Luquillo of Popular Party leaders, legislators and mayors, where he was informed that Mr. Méndez and other CGT leaders were campaigning against the leadership of the Popular Party, except for the Governor. Mr. Muño" Marín, it is reported, hlzn an investigation of the facts" and later was preparing to make a public repudiation of the campaign <lcl Mr. Méndez. Then the n'-'nfnrios of the nationalists made him occupy his time in other attentions, The Governor believes that the attitude of Mr. Mendez and his followers in his campaign, is a wrong tactic. "Inspired by small-minded purposes and petty ambitions." Declnrarlonos da Muñna When we asked Mr. Muñoz Marín how he felt about the legislative resolution declaring Mr. Méndez, president of the CGT (CIO), persona non grata, he made the "IgulánH" statement: "I fully understand the more than ample reasons that the Legislature has had to pass a resolution.i declnrnndo personn non grnta ni current president of the CGT (CIO), Mr. Tomás Méndez. "In my own understanding the action of the legislators has no relation whatsoever with certain controversy recently between Mr. Ramos Antonini and Mr. Mendez. legislative action, and my endorsement of clin, are highly motivated by reasons of democracy and public interest. "Since hncc some time, especially since my attention was drawn to the" legislators and mayor" of the eastern district, I have been observing the" attacks that are directed at legislators and the Legislature. I have come to the conclusion that these attacks are not merely an expression of courage or injustice or error. Clearly, they are a tactic. The tactic, is to try to discredit among the good and simple "workers" of Puerto Rico, practically all the men who have created an excellent record of labor and social legislation in the Legislature. Attack on Government "This is an attack on c) government. nmlgo of the workers - Continued on page 16, Col. 6)
Oscar Collazo Accused of Murder
" WlrWI mküte "si yg jF HE--m jB z "¿ i,
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10, (PU)-IT Puerto Rican nationalist Oscar Collazo, who tried to assassinate President Truman, was indicted for murder today by a federal grand jury in the death of a White House guard. The indictment carries the death penalty upon conviction. Congress of Civic Entities to Circulate Report Abroad Last Thursday afternoon, representatives of different Instltutions met in one of the "alone" Caribe Hilton Hotel, representatives of different civic Instltuclono" of the pal", with the Intention of constituting a league or congress of all the civic Institutions" of the pnls that would proceed immediately to organize a cnmpnftn n trnvross the United States" and the America hlspnnn. The essential purpose is to bring to public opinion in foreign countries a full and clear understanding of what happened in Puerto Rico during the first world war. This meeting was attended by representatives of the Boys" Clubs, Masonic Lodges, Knights of Columbus, Lions Clubs, Rotary Clubs, Altrusa Club, Damos Civic Club, Girls" Clubs, Elk" Clubs, and other institutions (Continued on page 16, Col. 4).
Candidates Who Won Tuesday's General Election in the United States
■ífflMMHBBBBIII ■■ Hi ; ------ Irwi fe Mi B1 __ RF* jw W-* ijí ''X jR - I fl EE EbíEs RL RL RL n I 7 i ■R r - \.R K w R I H ' k Bk M ■■ I R < . B ó- )R D|R R R R R ar-Mte -X' í I, - ¿ I BI HHHRH| i 1 1 : II la ' J'.
John I'arahall Butler, the Republican candidate who wrested the aenatorlal cacaílo for Maryland from Democrat Millard E, Tydlnga, r.parrco here Along with "u daughter while" receiving loa reiultadoi of the" election Tuesday. Butler defeated Tydlngs by a large majority of votes. At the back, we see Everett M. Dirksen, Republican candidate for the
Dirksen, the Republican candidate for the Senate seat, was jubilant as he listened to the polling promao" ef "u home in Pekin, Ililnoia, along with his daughter Joy (right). Everett defeated the Democratic leader in the Senate, Scott Lueaa. In the photograph on the right is Janea G. Donovan, candidate for the Democratic-Repub-
bllcana-llberal who defeated Vito Marcantonio in the race for the federal House of Representatives" representing New York's 18th District. He is accompanied by his wife, Mrs. Donovan, a large part of the voters of New York's 18th District are Puerto Ricans, on whose support the defeated candidate, Vito Marcantonio, had always relied. (Associated Press Photo),
Fortaleza Instruction Received A Group Opposed Legislators Considering Issue - For M. Nieve" Rivera Redacto! A concurrent resolution to "condemn and repudiate" Tomás Méndez, Mellas, president of the CGT, and at the same time declare him "persona non grata" to the members of the Legislature, kept the legislative work paralyzed during Thursday night, until an agreement was reached that finally allowed the work to resume in the evening of the same day. The House, which had set 11 a.m. as the time for the resumption of legislative work. M. as the time to resume bus lahorcx, was unable to meet hnstn ln" 7:30 P. M" Ira" a serle of meetings provoked by a group that did not participate riel crlterio rie their colleagues to take the matter to the conilderaclón of the legislative body, They held the dissenters that 1" legislative action give it to Méndez Mejias too much Importance; that the p matter was to be taken before the i Central Board of the Popular n Democratic Party; and that Ins Chambers, n quo have been summoned to enI tend in matter" of grnn transcen- . riend and public Importance", not rtcblan "er distracted" with a matter rio the nature of the one he wanted to raise. Instrucclone" do Fnrtaleta About 7:00 P. M., when it seemed not to have reached an agreement, to the House, - where the situation originated, - arrived ln "truédenos rie La Fortaleza, meeting the House Raja " the" 7:30 P. M. Deipué" that the Sub "ecretarlo, II'2 county Herminio Concepción da Gracia, read the Concurrent Raioludón | of U House No. 3 - and when "o I was going to put it to vote, the "peaker Erneito Ramo" Antonlnl, । who "e was in e| hemiciclo, 1 mientra" prraidln the "floor leader" Benjamín Ortiz, requested pa "ara to Icomlderar el P. riel S. 1, while" Sergeant-at-Arms" Pedro Vega Berrlo", Cario" Rabas"" and Francl "co 1 Sanchez, all" of the labor leadership in the Chamber. Eito" arrived when the P. of the S. 1 had not begun to be comlderate, entering then in the consideration of the Resolution "obre Méndez Mejla". 5 Text of the Resolution ' The Concurrent Resolution of the " House No. 2, which appears pre - seated by Representative Agua- ■ tin A. Velez, textually reads as follows: Concurrent Resolution To condemn and repudiate Mr. ' Tomás Méndez Mejlas for his attack" on the Legislature rie Puerto RL co, and in "u consequence declare him ' peraona non grata a lAg legitimo" repreicntantoi rie! People of Puerto Rico. WHEREAS: In the course of the last" mriM the "eftor Tomá" Méndez Mejfa" in "u character rie President rie the CGT Inc. (CIO) in Puerto Rico has dedicated himself throughout the island to hold workers' meetings convened for the purpose of labor organization: WHEREAS: Once the workers in those meetings were convened, Mr. Méndez Mejias has dedicated himself to turn them into political meetings of attack by defamation against the Government of Puerto Rico; WHEREAS: The" attack" by Mr. Méndez Mejias" has been concentrated against the" members" of the Legislature of Puerto Rico, reflrlling" him" with the" most false," abusive" and denigrating" qualification"; WHEREAS: This" tactic" of! "eftor Méndez Mejla" have "Ido dirigida" contrn a A "amblea Legl". latlva that has a clean record of nctuaclone" "obresallente" in be. WHEREAS: The "eftor Tomáa Méndez Mejla" when he carries out this" Injuitlflcado" attack" against the Government and against the" members rio the legislative branch especially is always careful to make the sal. WHEREAS: The "eftor Tomás Méndez Mejla" with this conduct will create in the working class of Puerto Rico a great dis. WHEREAS: The "eftor Tomás Méndez Mejla" with this conduct will create in the working class of Puerto Rico a great disorientation and confusion as to the integrity and honesty of the persons who constitute the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico and as to whether these persons may be acting with a purpose or motivation, as public servants, different and contrary to the purposes or motivations of the Governor of Puerto Rico in "or service to the people. Therefore: Be it resolved by the House of Representatives of Puer- I to Rico with the concurrence of the Senate: First.-To condemn and repudiate Mr. Tomás Méndez Mejlas for his (Continued on page 16, Col S) n
Oscar Collaio, the Puerto Rican nationalist who was wounded during the Attempt on the life of President Truman, hnbln from his coma ep ,in Washington hospital, with his attorney Leo A. Rover. Collazo is ncusndo of having killed a policeman during the shooting in front of ln Cnsn Rlnlr, Rover in the nfldn chokehold he assigned to! defendant ln Corto do District, in Wáshlngton, (Associated Frenan Photo).
The indictment, which consists of four counts, was handed up while Codazo was being transferred to a hospital in the District of Columbia pending arraignment, probably next Friday," Collazo has almost completely recovered (Continued on page 16. Col. 1) Jayuya Sanchez Castaño Case Indictment Postponed He Asked To Give 6 Nationalists Time For Defense For Luis Sanchez Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO Judge Thomas H. Robert, of the Federal Court agreed yesterday to postpone for two weeks the arraignment and trial of six Nationalists accused of federal crimes. Torresola Roura. Blanca Canales Torresola, Ramón Robles Torres, Mnrlo Irizarry Rivera, Fidel Irizarry Rivera and Erimidlo Marín ¡ Pngán appeared before the federal magistrate to hear the reading rie the accusations against them for having Incendiario ln oflcinn rio corroo" rio Jayuya, rioxtruyendo federal property and poxlnl matter or breaking into said office violently. The defendants were brought to court from the Ln Princesa jail, where they are being held," at nine o'clock (Continued on page 16, Col. 3).
The Complaints Against Lie. Albizu
Also Nationalist Leaders Include, Accusations Attack For Murder And Violate Security Law By Benjamín SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer Today they will read the" accusations against Don Pedro Albizu Campo" and other members" of the high leadership of the Nationalist Party, who will immediately be transferred" m the San Juan District Jail. The Attorney General, Vicente Géigrl Pnlanco. He informed yesterday that arrest warrants have been issued throughout the hln, under charges of different felonies against a total of 158 nnclonallsta". The San Juan District Jail was dcícongcstlonnd" yesterday by transferring tinos .150 inmates" from this pennl to the annex at the Indigent Asylum, so that there would be sufficient space pnrn the Nationalist prisoners. Mr. Félix Rodriguez Higgins. Felix Rodriguez Higgins, acting superintendent of prisons, directed yesterday Ins work" of organizing the new penitentiary, Lo" Nationalist prisoners will be led to ln Cárcel hnjo a strong custody of armed guards. Against Albizu Campos and other fellow members of the top nationalist leadership, three charges will be filed for assault to commit murder, four for illegal possession of weapons and one for violation of Law 5.1 of 1948, known as the Public Safety Law and commonly known as the Qandndo Law. Prosecutors from the Justice Department were very active yesterday in drafting indictments and studying other charges that could result in additional indictments against Albizu Campos and his companions, according to the Attorney General's Office. In the accusations of attack to commit murder Albizu Campo" and his companions" will be charged with having attacked ln" vidns rio several" policemen and detective". di "pnrendo <)c "d" ln residence of the former *n Sol street corner Cruz. MI IñotaNoñe" W portación Hegal de arma" have "u base en ln" pe "qul "ns made by prosecutors and poal find four weapons in his residence. Security Law Article 1 of Law 5.1 of the (Continued on page 16, Col. 7) Boat Service Remains Irregular As of yesterday it was still Irregular <-l to serve the boats of the Compañía Popular do Transporto, which only kept in operation three of the five units to which it is obliged by virtue of the franchise granted to it by the Public Service Commission. Yesterday, however, the corresponding federal authorities and an Inspector of the PSC were carrying out the inspection of a new boat that will probably be put into service today, which will increase the number of units dedicated to the transportation of passengers between San Juan and Cataño, and vice versa, by four. El soñar Emlque do Jesú", head of transit of the CSP, informed in EL MUNDO that a ln"(L'ontlnúa en 1" page 16, Col. 2)