THE NON DO
* Popular Leadership Accepts Permanent Union ' . J. * J f
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Medium cloudy with scattered showers mostly overnight and early morning. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, SO degrees; low, 73 degrees, Sea level barometric pressure, at 4:00 p.m., 20.87 inches of mercury,
NEW YORK, Dec. 8. (PÜLEIn the afternoon today ae Reported the following temperatures: New York, 48; Chicago, 34; Wáahington, 40; Miami, 87. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities considerably cloudy. Maximum temperature 43.
DIARIO DE LA MAÑANA EL PRIMER-DIARIO EN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
ANNUAL XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Poet Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY DECEMBER 9, 1950
NUMBER 14226 FIVE CENTAVOS
CHINESE PREPARE ANOTHER ONSLAUGHT
w i r 9 w < -Ji WiO A" fe 1 í ■ ■ -ASwBíI' 1 7, a. f
Vice Admiral F. S, Low, deputy chief of naval operations (Left); Vice Admiral Charles T. Joy (center), commander, Naval Forces Far Orlente; and Lt. Gen. Lemuel Shepherd, commander, Marine Corps Fleet
Lemuel Shepherd, commander of the Marine Corps Pacific Fleet, discuss the Korean situation in Admiral Joy's office during a visit to the Far East by the other two, - (Associated Press Photo).
Beef Price Rises: Cod Drops Supply Order Effective Monday For Island Trade Effective Monday, December 11 at 6 a.m., Acting Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Dr. Martin Hernandez, has issued administrative orders related to maximum prices to wholesalers and retailers, in the following items: 1-The maximum wholesale price of pals-produced or imported beef is increased from 27 cents a pound to 30 cents a pound. For the consumer: the steak does not fill the maximum price: the tenderloin and the mass of hip that was sold at 58 cents a pound will be sold at 62 cents; the round, long, bablUa. and suckling pig dough which sold for 58 cents will sell for 60 cents; stew meat which sold for 45 cents will sell for 42 cents; ground beef, ribs, soup meat and white bones remain at the maximum prices of 32, 85, 16 and 5 cents per pound, respectively. The set of increases and decreases in maximum authorized prices, and taking into account the composition of a beef in its different classes of । cortex, represent an increase for consumers that has been calculated at one and a half cents per pound (Continued on page 16, Col. 8).
Government Does Not Now Plan to Freeze Prices and Wages * However, Prepares Orders If Necessary. Auto Price Hikes To Be Investigated By ROBERT F. LOFTÜ.4
WASHINGTON, Dec. 8. (PU)-Price Administrator Michael V. Disnlle said today that the Government does not plan any immediate price freezes and pulls them, but warned automobile manufacturers that he has authority to cancel any price increases.
Dlsalle admitted that price controls and wage orders are being prepared in case they are needed. But he said it will take sixty to ninety days to set the machinery in motion and "at present I see no reason to impose such controls." Disalle held a joint press conference with Economic Stabilizer. Alan Valentino, and Salt Stabilizer Cyrus S. Chlng. He and Valentine hinted that they may force General Motors and Ford Motor Company to cancel price increases announced Tuesday night if the companies refuse to act voluntarily. Recent hikes Valentine said he is also watching steel prices but declined to say whether recent price hikes would be reviewed. The Genero's management has been asked to review recent price hikes. Motors, Ford, and eight other automobile firms will meet with Valentine and Disalle here in Washington next Wednesday to study auto prices. Valentine said (Continued on page 16, Col. 6)
Colonist Victory Tax Ruling To Be Appealed" Cane Case To Be Brought To Boston Court. - The Puerto Rico Farmers Association is preparing to appeal before the Circuit Court of Boston the lawsuit related to the so-called Victory Tax, which the Insular Government charged to the sugar cane settlers of the Island on the compensation and subsidy payments made to them by the Triple A for the years 104344 and 1944-45. This lawsuit, ruled against the colonists, involves the sum of approximately one million dollars that the farmers would have to pay to the Government of Puerto Rico, if the last judicial decision in the case were to prevail. (Continued on pg. 10 Col. 7)
NORTH N * M KOREA south ■ row 4 n Ufranptoui - he United Nations troops withdrew on December 7 and established a new line of defense, running from the port of Chlnnampo, forming an arc to Koksan (jagged line). In the northeast, American troops began to reach Koto after fighting fiercely to escape from a trap at Hagaru (circle). These troops will still have to face considerable enemy forces along the only scroa road to the Hamhung-Hungnam area (broken arrow). An attempt to open the road by troops from Hamfrung was stopped at Majon (Associated Press photo).
Island To Send Flowers To Prominent Daughters Mrs. Muñoz Makes 300 Corsages""- Lucican At Press Club Ball By William Dorvllller WASHINGTON, Dec. 8. (Special to THE WORLD)- Margaret Truman and nearly 300 daughters of Cabinet members, top government leaders and the world's most prominent" journalists will send flowers next Wednesday night as gifts from the women of Puerto Rico. Ms. Muñoz Marin is directing the preparation of 300 corsages for the annual Fathers and Daughters night at the National Press Club on December 13. Pan American World Airways is contributing to the transportation of the flowers from San Juan to Washington on a last minute flight that will ensure the freshness of the flowers when they are delivered. Also as a gift from Puerto Rico on the occasion, and a special project of Mrs. Muñoz Marin, will be 300 copies of this year's songbook that the Daughters will receive as they enter the Press Club ballroom. Father and Daughter The event is usually the brightest spot of the National Press Club social season, the main father-daughter combination being that of President Truman with his daughter Margaret. Secretary of the Treasury. Snyder, and his daughter, Drusie, will be the second point of Interest. Radford E. Mobley, president of the Press Club, said today that (Continued on page 16, Col. 6)
Sierra Raises Case Island Labor Surplus Says There Are 100,000 Employable People, Attends U.S. Convention " - - - ■ i In Puerto Rico there is a human resource surplus of 100,000 employable people, Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra 1 Berdecla told the Seventeenth National Conference on Labor, held at the U.S. National Labor Conference. Labor Inclon, held in Wá1 shlngton. 1 These human resources, said the Commissioner, "are at the dlsposposl- ■ clone of the Nation on the na- - clnnal Internal front at this hour when 1 she needs them." > In his speech, in which he con- ■ donated the attacks against Gov- - nndor Muñoz Marín and President ■ Truman, Mr. Sierra Berdecla - expressed himself in the following terms: ' "Puerto Rico s<" feel proud ' at this time to be able to offer its cooperation to the Nation, just as it has done in the - past. During the last war, more than 60,000 young Puerto Rican. 1 ers went overseas and fought, and many of them died for their homeland, which is the United States of America. At this very moment the 65th Regiment, composed of many Puerto Rican boys, is fighting in Korea shoulder to shoulder with the boys from New York, Ohio, Kentucky, California and the rest of our fellow citizens. California and the rest of our fellow citizens, shedding their blood for the defense of the Nation's democratic ideals. And just as we lay down our lives on the battlefield, so we wish to use our energies and our skills on the field of battle.
Muñoz Marín Ratified In Words
Géigel Finds President's "Realistic Formula" of (miaras Explain Their Position In Favor of New Ideology All* Popular Party leaders questioned yesterday expressed their support for the statement made by Governor Luis Muñoz Marín, regarding the future political relations between Puerto Rico and the United States. Mr. Muñnz Marín, the maximum leader and president of the Popular Party, favors the permanent association of Puerto Rico with the United States, under the formula of a special statehood that is neither independence nor statehood. The Attorney General, Vicenta Gélgcl Polanco, believes that the formula proposed by the Governor is a "realistic and dynamic formula". House Speaker Samuel R. Quiñones said that "we must believe in Puerto Rico's Independence within the Independence of the United States". The Speaker of the House, Lic. E. Ramos Antonin! expressed himself in favor of the Governor's pronouncement and pointed out the disadvantages of Statehood . On Independence Lic. Victor Gutierrez 1 Franqul" floor Majority Leader । in the Senate, said that Independence should be ruled out as a future drug because it would be "incorfipatl- ' ble" with the eddslon of "remaining united to the United States." On the other hand, Lic. Banja- - mln Ortiz, floor leader in the House, expressed his opposition to discarding Independence, although he favors the union of Puerto Rico with the United States "for a long pe! rlodo of years." The Island Auditor, Dr. Rafael de J. Cordero, said that as an economist he has done a study that has led him to the conclusion that Puerto Rico's withdrawal from the United States would result in "a collapse". Lower Commissioner Jorge J. Jimenez and Resident Commissioner Dr. A. Fernóg Isern expressed their full support for the statement. The latter rejected independence as "something out of place". Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra Bordéela and University Rector Jaime Benitez offered comments afterward. The Commissioner of Instruction could not be reached. The Comíalonado de Salud and the Comíalonado de Agricultura expressed their agreement with the Governor. The following were the comments expressed by the Attorney General, Vicente Polanco: "To the creative thought of Don Luis Muñoz Marin, the people of Puerto Rico owe significant steps forward in their political and social evolution. "It was his guiding word that awakened the mass of our peasantry to the responsibilities of citizenship in the dlligen(Continued on page 11, Cdl. 1)
a '■* -" . . ****** -*-'-""^. / _ . One of 1m box" of FUadelfla sardinal, which contained thirty-three pamphlet" on sabotage.
Allies Will Not Accept Aggression
But Would Discuss Peace with China Truman, Attlee, Have Plan to Strengthen Western Europe December, (PU). - President Truman and British Prime Minister Clement Attlee said today that they are prepared to hold peace conferences with the Chinese Communists, but would never bow to aggression in the Far East or anywhere else in the world. A 2,000-word communique describing the five days of talks between the two top leaders of the world's two strongest democracies said that "there is no question of appeasement and no question of rewarding aggression, whether in the Far East or anywhere else in the world. They also announced a common plan to strengthen Western Europe against a possible attack by the Russians, a plan that calls for both nations to proceed as soon as possible to build up their military forces. They will also increase the production of arms and war materiel for use by the other U.S. nations of the world. The statement said Truman expressed the hope that "the world's nations will never go so far as to demand the use of the atomic bomb." Read Collins reported The statement was made shortly after General J. Lawton Collins, chief of the military staff who had just returned from Japan. He informed the President and Minister Attlee and his aides that he believes the United Nations forces in Korea can stand on their own without "further heavy losses." The two leaders said they are willing to seek a cessation of hostilities in Korea "through negotiations." But they made it clear to the communist nations that they are not willing to submit to (Continued on page 16. Col. 1) Army To Give Only 72-Hour Passes WASHINGTON - Dec. 8.<PU).-The Army canceled plans to give Ucenses to troops under training in the continental United States. These Ucencias were to be granted so that they could celebrate Christmas and New Year's with their families. (Questioned by EL MUNDO, officials of the Antilles Military Department in Puerto Rico replied that they did not know if the same measure would apply to soldiers in Puerto Rico, (Continued on Page 16. Col. 7).
Red Sabotage Threat
Russians Sent Leaflets With Subversive Instructions, Inside Sardine Cans
Pnr FENDALL YERXA AND OGDEN R. REID The hunger awakened in a sailor for a seemingly innocent can of sardines brought to light the most insidious Communist weapon of subversion, violence and revolution ever to penetrate the borders of the United States. This occurred aboard a North American ship docked at the Philadelphia dock. The ship was preparing to put to sea and the crew was ordered to throw into the water any canned goods that were in bad condition. Consequently, they threw box after box of canned "food" overboard, not realizing that they were throwing away evidence of a communist conspiracy fatally aimed at the heart of the nation's internal security. But fortunately one of the sailors felt a sudden desire to eat sardines and decided to see if some of them were still in good condition. As a result of his action, the sinister secrets of a box of sardines can be publicly revealed today. With the blade of his penknife, the hungry sailor opened one of the cans, which he observed had been welded in a particular way.
was welded in a particular way. Inside it spoke thirty-three pamphlets. They were printed in Spanish and had been published in JJ46 and 1947. The first of them had on the cover the insignificant title "Reglamento oficial del juego de fútbol". But at the top of the first page, in capital letters, was the summary of the chapters. It read, "Sabotage of low and high voltage power lines." It contained nothing about soccer. Instead, the little booklet gave Instructions about "sabotage of power lines; sites where the effects of the same are most practical; transformers, most sensitive lithiums; stations, power stations: waterfalls, dams, ditches and pipelines." The sailor, who could not read Spanish, kept one of the boxes as a souvenir, and full of curiosity left the testo in two boxes, on a table, to see if anyone would come forward to redeem them. But his vigilance was imperfect and then they disappeared somewhere else in the United States. Later a U.S. merchant marine cadet who was on the same ship came into possession of the can of the sailor in question, and its contents.
the sailor in question, and its contents. He turned it over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and then the existence and true meaning of the pamphlets became known. Careful study revealed the complete list of titles in this sabotage library stored in sardine cans and called the "Little Sporting Collection." Time Bombay In addition to the manual on soccer, which gave instructions for sabotaging electrical plants and Installations and for the manufacture and use of incendiary bombs, he discusses similar booklets of "official regulations" on field hockey, boxing, tennis, ball and basketball. Here he talks in professional detail about how to short-circuit power lines to put an important plant out of service; how to place explosive charges secretly on the desk of "a citizen in whose harm or death we are interested"; how to mix sugar with certain common chemicals to make small time bombs, which would be intended to be placed in the chaps or headband" of an individual's hat, whose head would be smashed by the (Continued on page 22, Col. 1)
Thousands Already Flowing to Pyongyang
Infantrymen Follow Hamhung March An Eerie Calm Reigned Yesterday on Korea's Western Front For Rutheford Poata TOKYO, Saturday, Dec. 9 (P.U.)-Thousands of Chinese troops, in full battle array, poured into the Pyongyang sector today, in trains, trucks and bullock carts, for the great onslaught which, according to the frightened Koreans, will culminate in the total capture of Seoul within two weeks. Other selected Chinese troops were positioned 10 miles from Hamhung, near the beachhead on the Orient coast, towards which twenty thousand infantry and soldiers are advancing under a terrible Communist encirclement. Reports from the field and from headquarters indicated that a Chinese army estimated by General Douglas MacArthur at a potential strength of one million was maneuvering rapidly to deliver the coup de grace to the U.S. Eighth Army in the West and the U.S. Tenth Corps in the East. The American column struggling to break out of the Chinese trap north of Hamhung was advancing slowly and painfully, behind a tank vanguard," through the obstacles set by the Chinese on Iss roads, and repulsing one ambush after another. The convoy of infantrymen and soldiers stretched for nearly five miles along the mountainous road flanked by piles of snow. The infantrymen and soldiers continued their march through a violent snowstorm, which deprived them of air support yesterday, but as the skies cleared the planes renewed their furious attack with rocket bombs and incendiary bombs to stop the Chinese blocking the avenue of escape. A large Chinese column was sighted maneuvering southward along a course parallel to that of the sailors and soldiers. The column was sighted three or four miles west of Koto. Obviously, it was on a forced march toward Hamhung for the big rush against the dwindling Tenth Corps beachhead. The American "troop" of the Third and other units of the Tenth Corps repulsed a series of Chinese attacks around Hamhung. One of them took place only ten miles west of the city. The others were split along the entire length of the defense perimeter. An uneasy calm reigned on the western front, where the Eighth Army had taken up precarious positions south of Pyongyang. The calm had all the eerie characteristics of the mysterious lull that preceded the terrible Chinese counteroffensive two weeks ago. (Continued on page 16. Col. 8)
The bottle can be made in such a way that the fulmiM remains inside it, having part of the -- surface introduced into the gasoline. It can also, in the confection of this bottle n simple delay, be substituted the wick by an English pencil, pencil that will be encnntm replacing the wick or the length of the cap, fixing in its strenildad to the fulminant, that will have to be Introduced (its mitudi in the gasoline. The following drawings will give an idea of the effectiveness of this type of bottle. \w v - h /tn T - >1 - -j - : . Typical sabotage instructions of thea contained in the booklet; the diagram explains the construction of a simple bottle-type incendiary pump.