THE NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, HOT: Partly cloudy, but briefly cloudy, with a few scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. 77 degrees; low, W degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:Hn this afternoon, 30.18 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Jan. 18.(FU) - The following temperatures were reported this afternoon! New York, 44; Chicago, 42; WáshlngtóW, 41; Miami, 78. Predlcclonez for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: scattered and moderate hurts, with the highest temperature near M.
MANANA DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office. San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JANUARY 14, 1950
NUMBER 13904 FIVE CENTAVOS
Fire Leaves More Than 400 Families Homeless In Arecibo Slum f " - -
JISM Has No Petition On Buses Olivera* Owe Regateo No Obedece a Decreto Y Sí a Horario Actual For N. Nieves Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO No petition has been filed with the Island Minimum Wage Board for the revision of Mandatory Decree number 12, as reported by the General Administrator of the Transportation Authority. This is what Mr. Cándido Oliveras, president of the Salarlo Mínimo Island Board, alleged yesterday when questioned on the matter. Oliveras added "he does not agree with what was expressed by Mr. Caro and Mr. Toledo, from the TA and CSP, respectively, in the sense that the Mandatory Decree number 13 is responsible for the alleged situations of bargaining in the routes and congestion of passengers in the buses of the Authority. The President of the JJSM stated that in order to review a decree of this entity, the Board must make the corresponding agreement, based on the request of the interested parties. This, however, is not the case of the TA in relation to Mandatory Decree number 12. This review has not been officially requested by the Authority for the purposes expressed by its General Administrator, Mr. Caro. Previously, according to the President of the ISMB, a review of the aforementioned decree has been requested, but this was done elsewhere and for different reasons. Nn Es Reaponaahle Oliveras expressed that he did not agree that the Mandatory Decree No. 12 is responsible for the bargaining and passenger congestion in the TA buses, as expressed by Messrs. Caro and Toledo, from the TA and CSP, respectively. On the contrary, he considers that the current schedule is directly responsible for the "legacy" situations. With regard to "1 racing he said that the fact of two or more vehicles leaving together was the provoking factor of this situation, since it is logical to suppose, according to his own expression, "that for there to be racing two or more vehicles must be moving at the same time in the same direction". Oliveras stated, explaining the scope of the decree, that in order for the drivers of the TA to work at a hundred percent, they must make more than $24 in their eight-hour workday, a conclusion reached on the basis of the testlmotContinued on p. 12, col. 8).
Cause Russian Protest o i H B 1 219 Tlngfu F. TManr. delegate of the Chinese Nationalist government to the United Nations, has prompted a protest by the Russian delegate Jacoh Malik, the latter alleging that Tlngfu Tsiapg does not represent any nation. Mnllk left the U.N. Security Council for the second time (whose rotating president in January is Tslang), but the U.S. delegate asked that the work continue in spite of everything. (Photo P. A.) J. Malik Left the U.N. Council. Second Time He Demanded the Expulsion of the Chinese Delegate. - U. S. Asked to Continue By Richard Wltkln LAKE SUCCESS. New York, January 13.~<PU)-Russia walked out of the United Nations Security Council again tonight protesting its refusal to "expel the Chinese nationalists. The United States promptly demanded that the Council continue to function without Russia. Although Soviet delegate Jacob A. Malik announced that Russia would consider any illegal matter with the "Kuomintang" delegate present, the Council promptly proceeded to consider the next item on the agenda. Mallk's departure, his first in four days and the third in the history of the United Nations, came after the Council inflicted a 6 to 3 defeat on his proposal to depose the nationalist delegate, Tlngfu F. Tsiang. Only India and Yugoslavia approved the proposal, and only India and Yugoslavia approved the proposal.
A Strong Wind Helped Spread It Losses Estimated At More Than $100,000.- Help Is Being Provided By ENRTQUE "RAMIREZ BRAU Editor of EL MUNDO A total of approximately 450 to 500 small houses of wood and cardboard, including stores and part of a mosaic factory, were destroyed yesterday by a fire in Arecibo, the losses being estimated, according to provisional data, at about $100,000. It was about 10:30 a.m. yesterday morning when numerous residents of the Punta Borlnquen neighborhood, in front of the sea in Arecibo, saw an electric lighting pole on fire. It is not known if it was this pole that started the fire, but it is known that it marks the place where the conflagration began. The wind that has been blowing strongly in that city during the last two weeks, caused the flames to spread from the alley of the sewer. - The fire spread from the end of Domingo Rulz Street from east to west through the entire hamlet, until it reached the concrete house of R, Rodriguez, where the National Guard of Areclho, "1 m "ódo of Colonel Vazquez and Captain Padilla, received orders to make alleys to net the Fire, proceeding to Mesfruir ten houses, as we were informed on the ground. The first house to be burned was that of Mercedes Rivera, until reaching that of Rodriguez. Towards the eastern part of the burned area, the Cofres mosaic factory was partially destroyed. * A curious fact was reported by our correspondent in Arecibo, Mr. Víctor Rosarió. "a "I that all this week it had been raining and "yer it rained at two o'clock in the afternoon". The fire was extinguished at 12:45 in the afternoon. In the area of the fire we saw the Mayor of Arecibo, Darlo Goitia; House Representative Sigfredo Vélez González; and Carlos Paíteme, of the Cru? Mr. Goitla. Mr. Velez Gonzalez also said that the fire destroyed about 500 houses. Mayor Goitla informed EL MUNDO that the Punta Borinquen neighborhood is a shantytown where there are no fire hydrants, no gates or anything planned, and that the hamlet is located on someone else's land. The fire covered an area of 400 meters. Mr. Carlos Patterns and Colonel Vázquez ordered the public to leave the area in ruins, to begin other work and to avoid that some people could re(Continued on page 12. col 5)
Caserío Punta Borinquen, Arecibo, is Pasto de Las Llamas 9 ' s t fe,- " - /" Z * - I. 4 Ir W '. | "WO ' AJIk .Jr : 1 "*■ ■ i Z - |- - - . ■ ■ . ' \ ,'Z ... 1 1- - >
swwKWWWSS"""" These are two scenes of the dreadful fire that occurred yesterday morning in the Punta Borinquen neighborhood of Arecibo, when the flames were at the height of their destructive work. The strong wind blowing from the beach caused the flames to spread throughout the hamlet.
the entire hamlet. The fire lasted from 10:80 in the morning until 13:40 in the afternoon when firemen, national guardsmen and civilians, working together, managed to control it. Ten houses were expressly destroyed to contain the advance of the fire. It is estimated that about
It is estimated that about fifteen hundred people have been left homeless, as several hundred homes of poor families have been burned to ashes, Firefighters from all the neighboring towns came to the site of the fire. Three to four civilians and two firemen were slightly injured,
but none were hospitalized. The municipal and Inaula* res authorities began yesterday to take measures for the victims of this fire. (Photographs by Miguel de Casenave)
Muñoz and Fernós Prepare the Constitution Bill
Governor Still Has Not Set Date For Trip To Washington By Juan Martin" Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO Governor Muñoz Marin plans to go to the United States, but cannot yet set the exact or approximate date on which he will make the trip. The Governor and the Resident Commissioner, Dr. Antonio Fernós hern, have held several meetings to study various projects and then prepare a bill to be presented to Congress, "authorizing Puerto Rico to draft its own constitution. According to the Governor, after the best draft is chosen, he will wait for the most opportune time to go to Washington to explain and defend it. That, of course, will depend on innumerable circumstances which do not permit us to anticipate the date of the trip at this time,' both the Governor and the Resident Commissioner are confident that in the next few days they will have reached agreement and conclusions on the project authorizing the drafting of the constitution. We explain to the Governor of the cablegrams received in EL MUNDO, by our correspondents and those of the United Press, expressing the attitude of President Truman of having the doors of the White House open to receive Governor Muñoz Marin, and discuss with him the problems of Puerto Rico, and also of the attitude of the congressmen of attending to Puerto Rico before the sugar quotas are fixed. The Governor expressed his gratitude to the Administration and to the members of Congress and said that it has been very convenient for Puerto Rico that the House Ways and Means and Labor and Education subcommittees have visited us, since they have become aware of our problems and of the effort of this country to solve them. "It is really very satisfying," said the Governor, "to see the insight and ability of the congressmen who visited us, to understand our problems, our struggle to face them and the means they can use to help us solve them." The Governor is confident that the sugar surplus problem will be solved for the benefit of industrialists, farmers and above all for the workers, The Governor is studying data received from different sources and hopes to propose solutions on the best possible way to solve the sugar problem. No Agreement Dr. Fernós read or otherwise (Continued on p. 12. col. 6)
n Governor Luis Muñoz Marín works with Resident Commissioner, Dr. A. Fernós Isern, on the bill that will be filed before Congress, authorizing the lela to file its own constitution. 65 Perished In Submarine Disaster Norwegian Ship Collides With English Ship. - 5 Killed in SHATMAN Aircraft. The British Admiralty today abandoned all hopes of saving fifty-two crewmen trapped in the submarine Truculent, which sank in the Tea Meais estuary. At least 70 perished in the disaster, 'counting ñ from a rescue plane that crashed. A Navy diver penetrated the hull of the submersible, finding it completely filled with water. By the time the diver entered the ship's interior, crew members had been saved and the bodies of nine others had been rescued. Ten of the survivors were immediately brought to this Naval Base by the frigate Cowdray, together with three other bodies picked up last night shortly after a Swedish cargo ship rammed and sank the submarine. The commanding officer of the Truculent, Lieutenant C. P. Powers, who was among the first to return to the scene of the disaster to assist in the salvage effort, announced this morning that the Admiralty has ordered the arrest of the merchant ship Divina, which sank the submersible. The Divina is moored to a British Navy destroyer. Although early hopes of rescuing the crewmen who had sunk the Divina had been dashed, they had not been able to find her.
Boston Court to Hear Thirteen Cases on the Island
Challenges to Rental and Selective Choice Laws on the Calendar By LUIR SANCHEZ CAPPA EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Federal Court of Appeals for the First Circuit will hold its first session in Puerto Rico on February 7. The Rostan Court, to which cases are brought from the Federal Court in Puerto Rico and the island's Supreme Court, will come to the island for the first time to sit in San Juan. The justices forming the court are Calvert McGruder and Peter Woodbury. They will be accompanied on their trip to the Island by the judge of the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Mr. Albert B. Harris. To the latter appellate court is attached the U.S. District Court for the Virgin Islands. The calendar of cases to be heard by the Boston Court beginning February 7 in San Juan includes 13. Among them are the criminal cases being pursued by the People of the United States against the young nationalists Rafael Cancel Miranda, Miguel Angel Rula Allcea, Ramon Heracllo Medina Maysonave, Darlo Berrios Cruz, Reinaldo Trilla Martinez and Luis Manuel O'Neill Rosarlo. They were charged in San Juan Federal Court with refusing to register under the provisions of the federal Selective Service Act, in violation of that statute. They were found guilty by Federal Judge David Chavez. The Court sentenced Cancel Miranda and Medina Maisonave to two years and one day in prison each, and the others to one year. These sentences were appealed by the defense attorney, Juan Hernández Valls, for the Boston Court. Treaty of Paris It was reported yesterday that for the first time in Puerto Rico, the Boston Court of Appeals will consider the issue raised in the Federal Court of Puerto Rico, regarding the alleged nullity of the Treaty of Paris. The defense in these cases is expected to raise this issue to challenge the legality of the extension of the Selective Service Act to Puerto Rico. It is further expected that the defense will raise in the vlata of the cases the fact that under the United Nations Constitution, the United States cannot extend the Selective Service Act to Puerto Rico. Other constitutional issues will be submitted to the Boston Court by the defense in these cases. On the other hand, and in another case to be heard by the Court, the constitutionality of the Puerto Rico Tenancy Act will be raised. In the case of Victor Rivera SanUago v. R. Cohián Chinea and Company, counsel for the plaintiff (Continued on page 12 Col. 7)
Ateiinalo's Actuated By Fire Asylum
- . jH H BU HB"'" Elnora Kpperly, 28, arrives at a Rock talnnd, Illinois, courthouse to testify about eKtacandlo an! Hoapltal of DavatK port, before flzcal Bernard J. Moran. Mrs. Epparly, who was a patient at the hospital, has been accused of murder, committed by malicious arson; the fire took the lives of 41 women hospitalized there. (Photo P. A.) Driver's Lists To Be Searched To Eliminate Licenses Of Persons Deceased Or Unable To Drive The lists of persons authorized to drive motor vehicles by the Department of the Interior will be completely cleaned, eliminating from them all licenses granted to persons already deceased or who for any other circumstance have been rendered unable to drive. The Commissioner of the Interior, Mr. Jorge Jimenez, informed yesterday that an infinite number of persons who, due to apathy, lack of time or other reasons, have not done so within the term established by law, still have to renew their Ucencias, in accordance with the terms of the law, and are currently gularylo automobiles in violation of the provisions of said law. Requests Cooperation Creates the Commissioner of the Inte(Continued on pg. 12. col. 7)
New Impasse With Telefónica Arises
Union and Company Reject Offers Dominguez and Nogueras Explain the Attitude of the Two Parties Yesterday afternoon the collective negotiations which, at the initiative of the Conciliation Service "- resumed - between the Telephone Company and the Union of Employees? of that company - were broken off for the second time. This new impasse arose when, after the Union had rejected two offers for wage increases, the workers' group made a counter-proposal, which in turn was rejected by the Company. On this matter, Mr. José O. Domínguez, general manager and vice-president of the company, reported yesterday that when the talks were resumed on Wednesday, the company made a proposal on wages to the workers, which was rejected by the Union. "He declared that "the offer, if accepted by the Union, would have created a violent economic situation for the company" because it does not have sufficient means to cover the wage costs involved. He added that the company made íi ofottn, 'ron spirit of cooperation and the best desire to reach a satisfactory agreement with the employees." A Better Offer Further forward he said that yesterday the company made another better offer, offering higher wages than those in the first proposal. This offer, he said, "created an even more violent economic situation" and "was the final offer," but "with the same desire to reach an understanding, it was submitted to the Union. Finally, he stated that the Union then made a proposal that was completely unacceptable to the company. At this point the discussions were suspended, without agreeing on a date for future negotiations. For his part, Mr. Nicolas Nogueras Rivera, general secretary of the Ubre Federation and advisor to the Union in the talks, said that the offer made by the Company yesterday was as follows: increase of 7-112 percent in salary up to $840 per year; of six percent for the $840 loa.01 to $1,080; five per cent for those $1,080.01 to $1,200; 4-1-4 per cent for those $1,200.01 to $1,500; 3-1(3 per cent for those $1,500.01 to $1ROO; 2-V2 per cent for those $1,800.01 to $2,400; and increase at company's discretion, for those $2,400 and up. He further reported that the company had made it a condition that a three-year agreement be signed, and that the Union would waive other economic demands. It also made it a condition, he added, that the increases offered would take effect "once the contract was signed. He stated that this latter condition was proposed "despite the fact that the agreement which expired on December 31, 1948, provided that the increases to be agreed upon in a contra (Continued on p. 12. role, 4)