THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS PAMA LA ISLA, TODAY: - Considerable cloudiness, with occasional showers today and tonight. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 88 degrees: low, 76 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:88 p.m., 28.87 inches of mercury. .
NEW YORK, May 18. (FU). - In the afternoon today iaa alS lenses temperatures were reported : New York, ! Chicago, Miami, Wáahlnrton, no reports from the Weather Bureau, Forecast* for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities : cloudy and cold. Maximum temperature, M. V/ntoo from the Northwest.
DIARIO MARAÑA.
ir ; ' * . j -- ■ \ 1 V ' . i. " . I THE FIRST AND ONLY DAILY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 20, 1950 "
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Port Office, San Juan, P. B.
NUMBER 14024 FIVE CENTAVOS
Pro-Gag Effort Did Not Succeed
Southern Democrats Defeated Motion Dashed Truman's Hopes On Reasonable Standards Bill Fnr Raymond M. Lahr WASHINGTON, May 19 (FU)-Southern Democrats virtually dashed President Truman's hopes for passage of his hotly debated reasonable labor standards bill in the current Congressional injury. With the support of six Republicans, the Southern filibusters won the first major round in the two-week fight over racial rights by defeating a motion to immediately consider the measure. The bill would create a commission that could appeal to the courts to enforce rulings against dls. crimes in employment based on race, creed or color.' Northern Democrats and Republican supporters of the measure needed sixty-four votes to impose a gag and end the Southern oratory marathon. They got only cln. count and two. falling short by twelve of the required majority. The six Republican foes of the motion voted with twenty-six Democrats, mostly Southerners. ' I was a rude blow to President Truman, who made the bill one of his main campaign Issues. The Republican leader in the Senate, Kenneth S. Wherry of Nebraska, immediately exploited the fact that thirty-three Republicans voted in favor of the bill while the Democrats contributed only nineteen votes, So They Blame Each Other Wherry said the outcome proved that the Democrats could not keep their campaign promises, even with the moratorium rule they wanted. His remarks prompted another round of aerial complaints, as the Northern tAas tried to blame each other for the failure. Although Democratic leader Scott W. Lucas, of Chicago, predicted another test later in the day, he spoke of little hope for a different outcome. . Twelve senators were absent today, but one of them, Senator Garret L. Whithers, Democrat of Kentucky, is an enemy of the bill. IF the lineup remains the same - and all indications are that it will - the Administration will still have a vote. Lucas' only hope is to convince some of the opposition senators that even if the gag motion had passed today, its effect would only be to suspend discussion on the need to consider it. Then Southerners would have continued their campaign against the bill itself, which would have been another attempt to impose the gag rule. Republicans who contributed to the Administration's defeat were Styles Bridges of New Hampshire, Charles Ecton of Montana, Chan Gurney of South Da. kota, George Malone of Nevada, Karl Mundt of Dakota, and Charles Ecton of Montana. Karl Mundt, of South Dakota, and Milton R. Young, of North Dakota. Appeared Ill Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, of Michigan, leader of the Republican Party's foreign policy, appeared ill to vote in favor of Imposing the gag rule, (Continued on page 16, Col. 2)
Some 8,952 High Schools to Graduate
Colleges To Admit Only 3,000 More Graduates For Other Education Levels On Island By Benjamin Sentaría EL MUNDO Staff Writer More than 6,000 students would not find a place in our universities if all the 8,952 graduating this month from high schools applied for admission next year. . This is the conclusion drawn from the information given yesterday by the Commissioner of Instruction and President of the Superior Teaching Council of the University of Puerto Rico, Mr. Mariano Villaronga. In all the public colleges about 7,582 students will graduate and in the private ones about 1,370 - making a total of 8,952 who will receive their diplomas this month. About 3,000 of these, alone, would gain admission to our universities, should they all apply for such admission and qualify, as well, to pursue their college degrees. It has been reported that the University of Puerto Rico, our highest state-supported teaching center, could accommodate up to 2,500 in the basic courses-2,000 at Rio Piedras and 500 at Mayagüez. The Polytechnic Institute of San Germán has announced that it will be able to admit an additional 150 and the Catholic University of Santa Marla an additional 300, according to reports previously published by the Frense. Last year 7,739 students graduated from all the colleges of Puerto Rico, so that the number of graduates this year will exceed that of 1849 by 1,213. On the other hand, the number of ara. graduates in the other levels of lower education will surpass, extraorÚimaiteWenti than last year, according to data supplied by Mr. Pablo Roca, head of the Statistics Division of the Department of Instruction. There are currently 16,500 middle school students on public campuses and (Continued on page 16, Col. 6) Mayor Returns From New Orleans -my ■ Yesterday-at 2:00 P. M. returned to the wing Capital Administrator Fells" Rincon de Gautier, after attending the Third Interamerlrano Congress of Municipalities held in New Orleans. Mrs. Rincón de Gautier, after participating in the aforementioned Congress, which took place from May 2 to 6, attended the inauguration of De Lesseps Morrison, Mayor of New Orleans, reelected for a new term . Mr. Gabriel González Vidala, President of the Republic of Chile, was the guest of honor at the Interamerican Congress of Municipalities. The Administrator of the Capital intended to attend the Inter-American Conference for Democracy and Liberty, which was recently held in Havana, but was prevented from doing so for reasons beyond her control, as reported by Mr. Carlos Guzmán, Public Relations Officer of the Government of the Capital,
Graphics on the Explosion of Grenades on the East Coast
Two grenades found on the beach by residents of the Candelera Abajo neighborhood in Humacao and Cuchilla Guayante in Yabucoa exploded, killing three people and injuring five others. In the foreground we see the house of Luis Infante in the Candeletero Abajo neighborhood of Humacao, located about a kilometer and a half from the beach where the children found an explosion.
the beach where the children found one of the grenades. In this house Tomás Cruz Gutiérrez died and his cousins Luis Manuel and Fundador Infante were wounded. In the second term, above the wounded Manuel Ontrón, 77 years old, from the Cuchilla Guayanée neighborhood. Cuchilla Guayanée neighborhood of Yabucoa, and Luis Manual Infante, of the Candelero neighborhood.
1 Lehman Will Insist * Will Rigorously Ask 9 Senate To Include Island In Social Security
By James F. Cunningham WASHINGTON, May 19. (P. U.)-Senator Herbert H. Lehman, Democrat of New York, promised today to "insist vigorously, as I know how," for the restoration of Federal Social Security benefits for the orphans and the blind of Puerto Rico. The House of Representatives has approved this extension along with federal insurance for the elderly and survivors on the island. But the Senate Finance Committee removed public aid for Puerto Rico from the expanded Social Security legislation it reported to the upper chamber on Wednesday. Lehman, in his pledge to fight for the restoration of the public aid provision, said he believed Puerto Ricans had an "entitlement" to this aid. Direct federal payments to the elderly, blind and dependent children in Puerto Rico, Lehman said, "would be a notable and constructive contribution . ." "At a modest cost to the federal government," he said, "they would provide essential support to the efforts that local governments (Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands) are making to provide the unprivileged grains on these islands with the basic necessities of life."
Lehman said he would propose in the Senate amendments to correct "a number'of aspects" of the proposed Social Security law, which "I find very discouraging to me." The Senate is generally embroiled in a dispute over the President's proposed civil rights program. It is uncertain when senators will be free to consider Social Security, but most sources believe they will do so within the next four weeks. Lehman repeated the firm position he took on Social Security for Puerto Rico two weeks ago. "One point on which I have always expressed myself very strongly, and on which I intend to inviatlr with as much vigor as I know how," he said, "is the extension of public assistance provisions to Puerto Ricans and Virgin Islanders. If there is any group of American citizens who are particularly in need of the aid extended in this provision, it is the people of these islands, who are in economic conditions with which the local government can deal only in part." (Continued on page 16, Col. 3)
Preliminary plans are made for the next patron saint festivities of the Capital, Committees are appointed to organize the San Juan Bautista events. Preliminary plans for the next patron saint festivities of the Capital were outlined in a meeting held on Thursday afternoon, the 18th, in the office of the Acting Administrator of the Capital, Mr. José Rodríguez Olmo. At the meeting the meeting proceeded to designate toé WiWWir WéclaíeE who will be in charge of Implementing di. choa plans and recruiting the personnel who can put them into practice. "There is the intention that this year's San Juan Bautista festivities will surpass last year's and that they will constitute a powerful attraction for tourism during the summer season", the Municipality informs. Both the Acting Mayor and the Secretary of the Capital, Miss Josefina Rincón Marrero, gave a full explanation of the plans to be developed and asked all the members of the two committees to meet as soon as possible to adopt definitive agreements. Mr. Miguel Rodríguez Alberty (from the Justice Department); Mr. José M. Feliciano (from the Transportation Authority), and Mr. Miguel Meléndez Ortlz (from the Department of Agriculture and Commerce), were in charge of meeting with the high officials of the Navy, the Army and the National and Coast Guard of the United States, to negotiate the cooperation that said bodies can offer for the best possible success of the upcoming festivities. A committee was also selected, composed of Mi> guel Rodriguez Alberty and Arcillo Alvarado, and others, -which will be in charge of recommending a draft ordinance on the operation of the pikes during the next patron saint festivities, ordinance that will be part of the contract to be signed by the Mayor of the City of Puerto Rico and the Mayor of the City of Puerto Rico.
2 Explosions Decide They Were Casual Three People Died In Yabucoa and Humacao, When Grenades Exploded By Enrique Ramires Brau. El Mundo Staff Writer The Humacao District Attorney, Benjamín Guerra Mondragón, described the explosion of two projectiles or grenades that killed three people and wounded P. M., as accidental. Miguel Angel Gimenez of Yabucoa. Gimenez also reported that prosecutor Guerra Mondragon has closed the case. -As reported in the last edition of EL MUNDO, the day before yesterday at 5:00 p.m., several minors who were bathing at the beach in the Candelero Abajo neighborhood of Humacao, were found with an archeologist who took them home. After manipulating the tubular device, it exploded, killing 13-year-old Tomás Cruz Gutiérrez and seriously injuring his cousins Lula and Fernando Gutiérrez, also of the same age. Also by coincidence, this happened at the same time, according to the Yabucoa Police headquarters and confirmed by the prosecutor Benjamin Guerra Mondragon. At the Guayancy site on the Yabucoa beach, Eflgenlo Cruz Lugo found another device that he took to the house of José Pinot Millán, where it exploded, killing Alejandro Plnot Cruz, 18 years old and Eflgenlo Cruz Lugo, and seriously injuring Modesto Cruz Soils, 55 years old, Pedro Plnot Cruz, 17 years old and Manuel Colón Alvarado, 76 years old. Critical* Condition* The Fajardo District Hospital to which the five injured persons were taken informed EL MUNDO that only four of the five who were injured were confined there. The (Continued on page 16. Col. 8)
Boston Court Strikes Down Part of Tenancy Law
Eliminate Ne
Elimination of Street Businesses That Deter Public Roads 3p' 3 |K s
Employees of the Municipality of Ban Juan load a truck with street carts or stalls that were parked at the dock area on Fernandez Juncos Avenue in Banturce. The "campaign to eliminate these street businesses that are
public roads* is being carried out by the Tourist Office. The* cart* "nn taken* to the crematorium where its owners* can redeem its contents and the* cart* as well, with the condition of dedicating it* to another" end*.
Two Candidates For Federal Judge Mentioned Likely Bar Endorses Prosecutor Ponsa Feliú And Enrique Córdova Díaz By LUIS'SANCHEZ CAPPA EL MUNDO Staff Writer It is likely that the Federal Bar Association will endorse the candidacies of Francisco Ponsa Feliú and Enrique Córdova Díaz for the position of Federal District Judge in Puerto Rico, according to an authorized source connected with the organization. As is known, the presidency of the Federal Court has been vacant for some weeks, when the incumbent, David Chives, Jr., resigned his post before President Truman. His resignation was due to the fact that he decided to move to his home state of New Mexico to run for the governorship. The primaries to select the candidate for governor and to appear on the ballot for the next elections in that state will take place at the beginning of next June. The names of Mr. Córdova and Mr. Ponía Feliú, the latter acting federal prosecutor, have been submitted by a majority of the Board of Directors of the Federal Bar, requesting that they be recommended for the position. Both candidates enjoy the support of a majority of the Bar's officers and members, so it is almost certain that they will be recommended for the post.
A Continental Calls Battle "Cynical 99 During a Recess Witness Complained and the Other Was Thrown Out of Court, Duel of Wit With the Defense By J. M. GARCIA CAWEROff Editor of EL MUNDO A crowd composed of persons of all classes of "Ocíales, and especially of young people from the schools of San Juan and Santurce, In-
The crowd was again yesterday in the courtroom of Judge Julio Suarez Garrlga, to follow the proceedings against Miguel Angel Palou, accused of having killed eight people and having attempted against the lives of two others by setting fire with Miguel Cirilo Batalla and Lucas Cas. tro Angulta to the establishment of his property, which was installed in Alien Street in San Juan. The interest of the public remained yesterday concentrated on the witness Miguel Cirilo Batalla, whose arrogance dragged the sympathies of the public who attended the trial. The quick answers and sometimes full of irony, that Batalin gave to the questions of the lawyer César Andréu Ribas provoked yesterday, as in the previous days, hilarity and admiration in the public, that has given signs of sympathy towards the witness that already confessed to have "Ido the material author of the Fire that destroyed tos. macenes Palou. The laughter of the public yesterday forced Judge Suétw Garrlga to call to order on more than one occasion. He was debating with counsel in the courtroom and in the hallways. Immediately, bailiffs and police had to restrain the public trying to see Batalla, who at every turn was engaged in a debate with counsel. (Continued on page 16, Col. 1)
Gardner Speaks To Three Artists About Film Including Veronica Lake And Robert Montgomery. American comedian Ed Gardner, who intends to start filming a movie in Puerto Fleo soon, is in New York selecting the artists who will be cast in the film. The artist Gardner is in that city accompanied by film director Ed Montagne, on loan to Gardner from the RKO film company. He is negotiating with well-known celluloid artists who will act in the film to be shot in San Juan. Although no contract or commitment has been signed with them at this time, it was reported that Gardner and Montagne are considering hiring actors Robert Montgomery to star in the film. Carol Mathews and Veronica (Continued on ptglna 16 Col. 7)
BOSTON, Puerto Rico (PU)-The Court of Appeals today reversed a decision of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, ruling that Section 12 of the Renter Control Act is unconstitutional. The Court decided that the Puerto Rico Legislature exceeded its powers when it passed the Section, which has the effect of prohibiting the eviction of tenants after the expiration of their leases, even when the landlord desires the property for his own commercial use. The opinion of ta mavorla. written by Judge Albert B. Marls, of Philadelphia, held that Section 12 of the Fair Rent Act of 1946 "violates the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution and Section 2 of the Charter by allowing a landlord to file an unlawful usufruct against a tenant whose lease is for a tenant's own use, whose lease has expired, when the landlord desires in good faith to recover the leased property for the purpose of removing it from the rental market and devoting it to his private use." "Therefore, the case is remanded to the District Court for further consideration of plaintiff's complaint." Caen Surgió Bayamón The plaintiff in the case is Vie- g tor Rivera Santiago, who appealed to . 1a Court after the courts ' "fe Puerto Rico rejected his ten- J tatives to un- debt the R. ) Coblan Chinea and Co." Inc." of its Bayamon, Puerto Rico, property. Judge Peter Woodhuny of Concord, N.H., concurred. New Hampshire, concurred in the Maris opinion, but Chief Judge Calvert Magruder of Boston said in a dissenting opinion that it did not provide "sufficient basis for invalidation of Section 12. However, the majority opinion held that "Undoubtedly, as the plaintiff admits, the Legislature, in view of the public emergency produced by the shortage of housing and commercial buildings, exercised its right to raise the rents imposed by landlords for such property in the rental market. "In carrying out that objective, it had the right to adopt such measures as it deemed appropriate, provided they were reasonably related to the end pursued and were neither arbitrary nor discriminatory. Legislative attitude "In connection with this, it was within the powers of the Legislature to regulate the procedures for eviction of tenants" and the recovery of possession by landlords, in view of the fact that such procedure could be used by landlords to circumvent rent controls, the primary purpose of the Legislature. "We believe that 1a legislative intent in ta Section 12 of 1a Reasonable Rent Act was lm> plementing controls over lo" rents by law. "Therefore, we need not consider that the Legislature could, under its police powers, impose such absolute prohibitions on the rentals of the tenants.
Below, "le Humaean. Both are confined* in the Hospital de Di" trite de Fajardo. Below, we see the remains of the devices that exploded in different places on the eastern coast, around the same time. Lastly, we see Mrs. Anastaela Bosarlo, the owner of the house of Lula Bufante, showing to the tar-
Rosarte of the Humacao police, the place where she found the body of Tomás Grus Gutiérrea when she went to the house to give aid to the victims of the explosion. (Photograph" Exclusive from EL MUNDO, by Luis Catenave).