THE MNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy with a few thundershowers over the mountains today. Generally clear in the evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 80 degrees; low, 60 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level. - 4130 o'clock, 20.00 inches mercury.
NEW YORK, April 21. - (PU). -Today afternoon "e recorded the following temperatures: New York, M; Chicago, 40; Wáahington, M; Míaml, M. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: fair weather, with temperatures nearly Equal" to that" of today; temfleratura more elta, near 60. wind" of mild" b moderate", coming" from the west southwest.
TOMORROW'S DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY APRIL 22, 1950
NUMBER 13997 FIVE CENTAVOS
San Juan District Jail Chiefs Asked to Resign
Judge Lavandero's Action Censured Attorney General Already Received Report Palou's Wedding. They Find It Legal Fnr Benjamin Santana - ÉL MUNDO Editor The Attorney General, Vicenta Gélgel Polanco, *oRcluded yesterday the resignation of Ealblno González Monialvo. José N*grón Noy" and Fernando Sullveres. The first is Mayor of the District of San Luán, the second is Auxiliary Mayor, and the third is Sergeant of the Guardia Pe. nol- all involved in the case of the wedding of Miguel A. Palou and Paulina Díaz. The Attorney General also instructed the Superintendent of Prialones, Mr. J. Antonio Alvarado, to bring charges against the Penal Guards Rafael Lula Pizarro and Evangelista Peña, "for -"" llegalea performances and'r*pro conduct. ■ chahlo during the celebration of the Palou.Dlaz wedding". The participation of the officiating judge in the ceremonies. Pablo José Santiago Lavandero. was considered by the Procurador as "highly objectionable". The Chief of Justice also gave instructions that the vialtas of César Andreu Rl. bas to the penitentiary be in accordance with the* established regulations. Details of the Investigation The investigation of the wedding, considered legal, was carried out by Francisco Coll Moya, by order of the Attorney General. - He interrogated IR witnesses, including doctors José L. Robert and J. R. Rolenson; Warden Gonzé. Lz and his assistant Negrón Noya. o'ho prison wardens and see them reel uses, the Demographic Registrar of Santurce, María ! ulsa Gon. zólez; Judge Pablo José Santiago Lavandero; and others. The In vestí gadoV examined the marriage certificate, the criminal record of Palou and his medical hysteria, and the list of witnesses against him for the crimes he was charged with. Then, when practicing the investigation, he followed the following objectives: 1- If the marriage between Miguel A. Palou and Paulina Diaz was really celebrated. 2- Legal aspect of said marriage as to its validity. 3- Authority of the Judge to celebrate it. and his legal and administrative responsibility. 4- Knowledge of the Warden of U jail, aya managements to intor. mar to! Procurator of the event, and his legal and administrative responsibility. 5- Intervention of the admlniatratlvo oel penal personnel, in the cele, bración of the wedding. 6- Legal effects of the marriage in the hearing of the cases against Palou. Relación de Hecho" From the investigation it appears that the marriage certificate was obtained on Holy Thursday, April 6. April 6, and the medical examinations appear signed that same day by Dr. Tur Robert. This doctor completed the examination at the prison, examining, with the permission of Dr. Rolenson, the medical doctor of the institution, the medical chart of Palou. All this was done in the presence of and with the consent of the mayor (Continued on Page 13, Col. 3) Identify Her Son Throughout the World He Was Run Over By Car in Vega Alta A mother identified her son, who perished in a car accident, by seeing the photograph published by EL MUNDO. On April 11, on the ■number 2. road in the Algarrobo neighborhood of Vega Alta, a car ran over a young boy whom the police have not been able to identify. The day before yesterday, Lieutenant Jose Escobar Diaz, commander of the Vega Alta Police, in a letter addressed to the Fingerprint Bureau, informed that Mrs. Francisca Gonzalez Rlulz, upon seeing the photograph of the boy published in EL MUNDO, identified him as her son Francisco Santana Gonzalez. The boy, according to Mrs. Gonzalez, was working at the farm of Mrs. Francisca Figueroa in Vega Alta and had left his home to go to work. It was not until EL MUNDO published the photograph that Mrs. Gonzalez learned that the victim of the automobile accident was her son,
JU U HI* Bk J J h JSE I B ■ few& . 'Wl Jr BALRINO GONZALEZ Ship To Leave Washington For Island Sets Sail June 18 With About 350 Tourists From N. Y. and Capital By WILLIAM DORVILLIER WASHINGTON, April 21. -The United States Travel Agency said today that the first ship to sail from the Nation's Capital will sail to Puerto Rico June 18 carrying 8M passengers for a three-day excursion to the West Indies. Chartered by the travel agency for this first Wáshlngton excursion, the steamer Evangeline, of the Eastern Staampshlp Lines, will sail from New York with 100 passengers on board...June 17 will take 250 additional passperos at Wáshlngton on June 18, and arrive at San Juan at 7:00 A. M. June 22. John E. Smith, president of the agency, told EL MUNDO that "if the tour fien* economic success, it is probable that similar excursions will be made later in the year." The -departure of the 10,000 tnr""''rfia-" huqu* of'He Wáshingtnn was made possible by 1the completion of dredging operations in the Potomac Canal and Wáshlngton harbor. He conferred with Fernós Smith said he has conferred with Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern. and has also been in touch with Stanton Robbins, head of the Visitors Division of the Puerto Rico Tourism Bureau. He added that a reception is being planned for when *1 Evangeline arrives in Puerto Rico. The agency, he said, conducted another excursion to the island in 193R with the cooperation of the Puerto Rico Tourism Bureau. The cruise from New York will be 13 days and from Washington 11 days. Full passage from New York, will cost $295, and from Wáshlngton, S275. The Exgngellne will serve as a hotel for the tourists, who will spend about 24 hours in San Juan on June 22 before departing for St. Thomas and Nassau in the Bahamas,
The Soviet Rejects the Demands i I I Made by the United States i í í ™ ™ = = = = . = = 7T ■ . V... ■ L
Truman Asks To Extend Rent Law Claims Elimination Of Control Would Affect National Economy WASHlNGfÓÑr "brn 21. (PU) - President Truman today launched an intensive campaign for a year or more of federal rent controls to prevent "a wave of exorbitant rent increases." The present law expires June 30 and there is a strong inclination in Congress to let it expire. Mr. Truman sent a special message to the House and Senate urging continuation of Federal controls until June 30, 1951. He said that the housing shortage was still acute and that ending the controls would mean "serious setbacks for millions of people." Chairman of the National Democratic Party. William M. Royle, Jr. sent a volley to party agitators for a nationwide campaign to influence the Oí gress vote on the issue. Half of Boyle's weekly news letters to party agitators throughout the country were devoted to explaining the arguments in favor of the federal rent control law. The Senate Ranearlo Committee begins hearings next Monday on the continuation of the rent control law - the only one which has remained in effect as far as federal conti'biee established during the war, In his message, Mr. Truman urged an extension of the present "orderly decontrol" rule, and the policy of granting increases to landlords when they were warranted. To show that the law had been honestly administered, he said that last year increases had been granted to owners covering more than '.tOO.OOO units. He said the average authorized increase was 18 percent. Rising in Some Cases Emphasizing that the present law also allows local communities to end Federal controls on their own initiative, Mr. Truman said that such action had been taken "prematurely" in many areas, and that rents had risen by as much as 56 percent, "It is clear, therefore," he said, "that a sudden and simultaneous removal of rent controls on a national scale would precipitate a wave of exhorbitant rent increases." He said that would reduce purchasing power particularly among ios milliona do families rte Low income and merilanos, and seriously affect the Nation's entire economy. Most of the construction after the war, he argued, has been for higher income families. He said that rental housing for those earning less than $300 mens'.islew. "are still very scarce." (Continued on page 14, Col. 5)
O® 1* W fe £ ■.Ir VW. ' i wr ■ IB IB IB I yH -
Capital Administrator Mrs. Felisa Rincon de Gautier, (left), and Mrs. Clara Luz Vlsearrondo de Quiñones, while visiting yesterday, Vejea Day, the andana de 11" afloa of.
"dad Eugenia Rivera, confined in a nursing home in Santurce. Observe Ib scene a Sister of Ib Charity, one of those who have dedicated their lives to serving the elderly, the sick and the needy.
Alvarez Expresses Likelihood of Returning to Mayoralty Monday
The meeting of the Municipal Assembly of Rio Piedras on Thursday night, "turned into a rally of support for Mayor Augusto Alvarez. In the photograph above, we see dozens of supporters of the accused mayor, as they cheered him in
Bill Ready To Be Viewed Bill Constitution Negotiated Preniipueato Gave Green Light. (PU)E1 Department of the Interior today notified Resident Commissioner Antonio Fernos Isern that the Budget Committee has given the green light to the bill to allow Puerto Rico to draft its own Constitution, clearing the way for hearings in the appropriate House and Senate committees. "(Continued on page 14, Col. 4> (Continued on page 14, Col. 4>).
Honoring Ja Vejez
the salt" of ""Mlonea of the Municipal Assembly of the Municipality of Río Piedras. Below, "I Mayor Alvares, escorted by members of the Police, goes to the Mayor's Office followed by hundreds of people who expressed their sympathy (Photo EL MUNDO.).
Municipal Assembly Meeting Gave Mayor Río Piedras Mayor's Protest Resolution. - Supporters Come Out in Demonstration for the City By Rurkn E. RIVERA Rodactnr rt" EL MUNDO Auguslo P. Alvaros, Mayor of Rio Piedras, declared last night before a large gathering of popular voters and municipal councilmen that "in all probability I will have to resume my duties as Mayor next Monday, once I have thought over my present situation once again".
The above statements by Mayor Alvarez were loudly* rament® applauded by the citizens present, who had been summoned there to learn of a resolution approved that same evening by the Municipal Assembly, condemning the statements made in a section of the press, to the effect that the charges" brought by the Department of Justice had been dropped.
Civic Clubs Offered a Luncheon to the Elderly of the Miramar Nursing Home
The "Club Cívico de Dama", presided by Mrs. Delia Quiñonee de Arneldo Meynera, offered yesterday a lunch to the elderly women and sisters of the Asilo de Ancianas de la Capital, located in Miramar, on the occasion of the Day of the Elderly. The Mayor of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón ds Gautier, will offer today another homage in the Sixto Escobar Park to the Sen Juan Seniors. In the tribute there will be several entertainment shows and cash gifts, objects of daily use and clothes of the anchors of the Capital. The lunch offered yesterday to the elderly women of Miramar was attended by the Mayoress, Mrs. Rincón do Gautier; Mrs. Clara Luz Viscarrondo do Quiñones, president of the Damao Volunteer Service of the Capital; Mrs. Aida P. de Almí.otv of the Civic Club; the visiting artist and columnist, Miss Hedda Hopper, Mrs. María de
Alvarez, assistant to the Municipal Administrator and another" lady". - Mrs. Rincon Je Gautier gave several gifts to the old ladies and also visited other institutions where the elderly are besieged. The Mayoress, during her visit to the Asilo de Miramar, as well as Mrs. Vizcarrondo de Quiñonee. spent time with 1" elderly Bisutería Rivera, 115 years old, who sweetens much of her loneliness with the visits of her nephews and nieces and the children who come to visit her. Today's Fitstt The Mayor of San Juan, as every year, will celebrate today a tribute to the a.cianos of the Capital at the Sixto Escobar Park. This tribute *.erá exclusively pan loa an cianea residents in San Juan Santurce and sue barrios, it is hoped that it does not create the problem of, previous years, when the local was invaded by elderly people from other populations of (Continued on page 14. Col 8,
It is hoped that the "ticla against the current municipal incumbent of Rio Piedra" would not be brought before that municipal body for consideration on the grounds that it would exonerate Mayor Alvarez. The following assembly members were present at the aforementioned extraordinary meeting: José Maídonado Camacho, president; José Rnhle" Castro, Andrés Díaz, Domingo Díaz Rivera. Jdlda Frank, Manuel Clavel Heltrnan, Antonio Ontrón, Marcelino Esquilln, Juan Hierbe, Pablo Torres Medina and Raquelina A. de Ramos. The approved resolution states the following: "Whereas: we have learned from a reader of Ja Prensa, of the terms of the new Municipal Law, signed by the Governor of Puerto Rico, dated April 18, 1950, which completely eliminates the powers of the Municipal Assemblies to inter (Continued on page 14, Col. 2) I
Two Irregularities are denounced in the report related to the "Interclass" game recently held" at Central High School. According to the Report "e de "pacharon la" claae" in this campus without the required consent of the corresponding authorities; and a dance was organized in the Escambron without permission of the Commissioner of Instruction, following other rules than those established by the Department. The investigation was conducted by Mr. Juan G. Rivera, Director of Secondary Schools; Mr. Era "to Rivera Tesado, Superintendent of Schools of San Juan; and Mr. Frank Campo, Supervisor of Education,
Vinson Points to Possible War Russia Warns I Will Avoid Violating Its Territory. - Pilots Decorated By HENRY SHAPIRO MOSCOW, April 21. (PU)-The Soviet Government today repeated its" charges that an American plane has violated Russian territory, and warned that Moscow airmen have standing orders to fire on any foreign plane that crosses" the frontier and refuses to land. In a note delivered to U.S. Ambassador Alan G. Kirk at noon today, the Soviet Union categorically rejected the U.S. version of the incident in the Baltic area, and rejected U.S. demands for compensation. The Russian Government accused the American Government of trying to cover up illegal acts of some" of its subordinates which "flagrantly violate agreements recognized under international law". Simultaneously it repudiated as "absurd and totally unfounded" the American demand that Soviet airmen be ordered to avoid similar incidents "under any pretext whatsoever''. Throughout the note the Soviet Government insisted that the plane in question was an "R-29 Flying Fortress" and not a Navy Privateer. The Bolshevik note again accused the U.S. plane of having fired first at the Soviet planes which tried to force it to land. Justifies Action "It is not difficult to understand that any plane of any pal" obliged to protect the sovereignty of its borders, in case a foreign plane violated" the borders of its homeland, would have acted in a manner precisely similar to that of the Soviet planes.... "As for the Instructions to Soviet airmen mentioned in the American note, the appropriate Intrucdone" have been in force for a long time and are as follows: "In case of violation of the" frontiers of the country by a foreign plane, Soviet airmen have orders to force it to land on Soviet territory and, in case of resistance, to open fire on it". The first Soviet note was delivered to Kirk on April 11. It reported that an American plane, type B-29, had flown over the territory of the Soviet republic of Latvia, had refused orders to land from Soviet planes, had fired at Russian planes, and had been pursued by them. Today's note was a reply to the American note, which said that the plane in question was an unarmed Navy Privateer. The Soviet note said that "according to verified data" it was in a position to state that: "These facts completely refute the statements of the American Government to the effect that the American plane did not violate the border of the Soviet Union and that it was unarmed. "In the light of the facts" established. the statements of the United States Government cannot be considered in any other way than an attempt to cover up !" responsibility for a crass vlol". cation of international law." U.S. Action" LONDON, April 21. (PU)-The U.S. Third Air Division, which controls all U.S. B-29 bombers in Europe, categorically rejected Russian allegations that it was a B-29 which flew over Latvian territory on April 8. An Air Force spokesman said that an intensive investigation had shown that there were no B-29 UFO aircraft over the Baltic Sea on that day. Official circles also said there were no British "fortresses" flying over the Baltic on April 8. Britain has a number of I (Continued on page 14. Col 6)
. "- " ■ -- * Alleged Irregularities At the Central High School
Log acts occurred a few days before Holy Week, at the Central High School in Santurce and at the Escambrón. Commissioner Villarongg did not speak yesterday about the final action to be taken in this matter in relation to Ing. Details of the Ctw The sophomores and seniors engaged in an athletic "joust" against the juniors at Central High School. According to the statements of the principal, Mr. E. Audes, some confusion over the naming of a girl forced the students to play against the juniors in an athletic contest.
The Population in Rural Areas Has Diminished.
Rio Piedras Population Doubles By RURICo "e7 RIVERA EL MUNDO Staff Writer With only nine days to go before the end of the population census, the Census Bureau in Puerto Rico has counted a total of 1,939,860 people as of April 18, missing only 60,140 more rare to reach the two million mark. The 1950 Census already surpassed the 1940 Census figure by a total of 70,605 persons. In revealing the above population figures, Census Officials in Puerto Rico stated that the proportion of the rural population had increased, adding that the island of Puerto Rico was becoming one of the world's leading cities. Census Officials ventured to say that apparently the population of Puerto Rico will not give the total they had thought, i.e., 2,300,000 inhabitants. The judgment was made on the basis of the development of the poiRaclonal census carried out so far, Río Piedras Segundo The traditional population supremacy that the Perla del Su.' had over the rest of the large cities of the Island, has finally fallen. According to statistics gathered to date, the population of Rio Piedras has doubled and is expected to increase even more. As of April 18, a total of 112,000 inhabitants speak in the university town compared to those who spoke in 1940 or ana 68,290. For the 1940 census, Ponce had a population of 105,000. It was revealed that the population increase in Ponce is in a proportion more ah than loria (Continued on page 34. Col, 5) , J ■ Maritime Strike Averted East and Gulf NEW YORK, sbrll 21, (PU)-A maritime strike in the Eastern part of the Nation and the Gulf coast, scheduled for midnight Saturday, has been averted, the Federal Mediation Service announced today. The settlement of the dispute, which involved safety and employee hiring methods, was announced after 22 hours of intense negotiations between the shipowners, the American Federation of Labor-affiliated Union of Masters, Second Officers and Planners and federal mediators. The details of the understanding were not announced. Loa aalarloa did not "ataban involved in the dispute. A strike by the 4,000 deck workers represented by the union would have paralyzed 0 percent of maritime activities in the East and Gulf coasts. The National Maritime Union, an affiliate of the Congreao of Industrial Organizations, has promised help to deck officers in the event of a strike. The federal media- । clone panel which negotiated j| arréalo "ataba prealdldo by Clyde M. Milla, ssyecial aide to Cyrua Chlng, Chief of the Federal Mediation Service.