THE NfiNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Medium cloudy with scattered showers during the day and at night. IN SAN JUAN, Maximum temperature, 81 degrees; minimum, 70 degrees, Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., of, 80.08 inches of mercury.
NEW YOBX, hand 8. (PU), - Late today m reported the following temperatures: New York, 87; Chicago, 29; Wáalungton. 29; Wáalüngton, St; Miami, 78. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and doubtful" vednaa: cloudy and not so cold, followed by snow during the afternoon. Most sita temperature between 88 and 89. moderate" wind from the east.
LA MAÑANA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY MARCH 4, 1950
NUMBER 13949 CINCO CENTAVO
Farmers' Credit Institution Organized on the Island
Interest Rate Will Be Further Reduced Part of National System. For Rurlco E. Rivera EL MUNDO Staff Writer A group of Puerto Rican farmers, customers of the Puerto Rico Branch of the Federal Agricultural Bank of Baltimore, met yesterday at the bank's offices in San Juan to organize a chapter of the National Farmers Loan Association. The new chapter, which is associated with the National Farm Loan Associations of the United States, was formed as follows: Board of Directors: Francisco López Domínguez, Guillermo Látlmer, Jesús T. PiAero, Juan E. Mayoral, Manuel Anzalota, Jaime A. Vlcéns and Arturo Baldrlch. This Board of Directors in turn elected the following administrative officers: Francisco López, president; Guillermo Lá timer, vice-president; Miguel A. Pons, executive vice-president and secretary-treasurer; Juan Carrló, loan officer and assistant secretary-treasurer; Manuel Pérez, finance officer and assistant secretary-treasurer; Jesús V, Fulladosa, assistant secretary-treasurer. Borlcua Farmers' Capacity" Explaining the new organization, Mr. Miguel A. Pons, assistant manager of the*Federal Bank, said yesterday that "the Federal Bank, which has been organized for 27 years, provided by law that the bank's loans are made directly between the bank and the farmer. "In October 1949," he added, "the law was amended and it was authorized that loans to Puerto Rico would be made through the National Farmers' Loan Associations. This will mean," continued Mr. Pona, "that loans will now be made through this cooperative association of the bank's customers themselves. He interpreted this as Congress recognizing the ability of Puerto Rican farmers to handle these matters," Mr. Pons explains that in view of this power, granted by law, to form the association, several prominent farmers met in San Juan, including the following: Francisco López Dominguez, Guillermo Látlmer, Juan E. Mayoral, Jaime A. Vlcéns, Manuel Anzalota, Ramón Flores. Roberto MuAoz McCormick, José Joaquín López, Amador Torres Becerra and Arturo Baldrlch. Piftero Es Miembro Mr. Pons also revealed that the former governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jesús T. PiAero, is one of the organizers of this association, but since he is not on the Island, he was unable to attend yesterday's meeting. However, it was reported that Mr. PiAero signed the necessary documents as incorporator of the Association. Mr. Domingo Boret Santos is also listed as Incorporator although he was unable to attend the meeting due to illness. Cooperative Principles Explained 1 At yesterday's meeting several officials of the Federal Bank explained to those present the principles of this cooperative in the United States. Mr. J, W. Miller, vice president of the Federal Bank, explained the various phases of the organization. Also Mr. Horace B. Wllliams, assistant treasurer of the Federal Bank in Baltimore made several explanations to the farmers regarding the organization under discussion. For his part, the Bank's legal counsel, Mr. Frank Martinez, explained to the farmers, in detail, the operation of the associations and the scope of the same. He said that this association will provide loans for the following purposes: L To help purchase farms; 2. to purchase farm implements, livestock, fertilizer, etc.; 3. to construct or repair buildings or make permanent improvements on the farm offered as collateral; 4. to pay mortgages on the farm offered as collateral or on another farm even if it is not offered by the farmer as collateral for the loan; 5. to pay farm debts incurred by the farmer in the purchase of the farm; 6. to pay farm debts incurred by the farmer in the purchase of the farm; 7. to pay farm debts incurred by the farmer in the purchase of the farm; 8. to pay farm debts incurred by the farmer in the purchase of the farm. to pay agricultural debts incurred by the applicant; 8 to pay in general any kind of debt incurred by the applicant at least two years prior to the date of filing of the loan application; and 7 to provide funds to the applicant for agricultural purposes in general. Agreements Made Yesterday the elected Board of Directors made several agreements regarding the Association's by-laws, which will be submitted to the Federal Bank's Contra! office in Baltimore and Washington, D. C., for final approval. He explained to the farmers that (Continued on page 18, Col. 8)
Veteran's Agency" Hard Staff Severance WASHINGTON, hand 8. - (PU). - The Veterans Administration disclosed today that it will furlough 7,800 employees out of its payroll of 190.' 000, during the next five weeks. Ix>s economy layoffs are intended to bring the operating expenses of the schedule into line with the reduced budget for 1981. which goes into effect July 1. next. the furloughs will be nationwide and will affect all branches. The largest reduction will be in the non-professional corps of the veterans' hospitals and other medical services. Doctors and nurses will not be laid off, but - about 8,909 employees will be furloughed.
An alleged "racket" known by the name of "La Machina", which operated during the celebration of public shows at the Sixto Escobar Park, was discovered by the Internal Revenue agents and three persons were arrested, among them an employee of the aforementioned park. This was reported yesterday by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol Luis Descartes, who revealed that the "racket" consisted of the resale of tickets given by the spectators that were not deposited in the ballot box. Regarding this matter, the Treasurer offered the following statements: "The Treasurer of Puerto Rico received information about the existence of a racket known as "La Machina", which operated during the celebration of public shows at the Sixto Escobar Park. The facts denounced constituted a violation to Section 8 of Law No. 160 of 1945 and Article 29 of Regulation No. 63 of Arb'lrins promulgated by the Hon. Treasurer of Puerto Rico in June 1947. To combat this violation of the law, the Treasurer assigned a number of internal revenue agents, with instructions to investigate the alleged racket. The investigation so far shows that a janitor at Sixto Escobar Park, by the name of Antulio García S "nzenón, operating in combination with individuals by the name of José Cumba Santiago, of San Juan, and Juan Bautista Figueroa, alias "El Capitán", of Santurce, are the persons involved in the clandestine activities. "This racket consisted in the retention by the doorman García S "n* xenón of tickets delivered by spectators who entered through his door, instead of depositing them in the ballot box, as required by law. Once this retention was made, the tickets were passed by Garda Sanzenón through a number of tricks and gimmicks, to his runners Cumba Santiago and Figueroa Colón. The aforementioned brokers were taken to the outskirts of the park, where they proceeded to resell the tickets, under the understanding with Garda Sanzenón that they had to give him half of the proceeds of the sale. On the night of February 22 of this year, or "on the second night in which the games of the Caribbean Series were being held, the agents of the Internal Revenue Service (Continued on Page 16-Col. 5)
By José M. García Calderón Editor of EL MUNDO Before Judge Julio Suárez Garríga were filed in the afternoon the accusations that prosecutor Angel Viera Martínez has formulated against Lucas Castre Angulta, Miguel A. Palou and Miguel Cirilo Batalla Sucre for the alleged commission of eight crimes of murder and two of attempt on life. Shortly after the charges were filed, Judge Suarez Garriga proceeded to set the date for the arraignment, which will take place next week. The indictments will be read to Palou on Tuesday, March 7 and to Lp. cas Castro Angulta and MigueKC. Batalla "1 Wednesday, March 8 and Thursday, March 9, respectively. The filing of the indictments
Senate Passes Proceeding For Caserío Ponce Transfers Parcel Destined For Hospital. - Bills Filed By 8. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL INUNDO The Senate approved yesterday, on third reading, a bill to the effect that the. Municipal Authority on Homes of Ponce may purchase the land originally intended for the construction of the District Hospital. This bill is numbered 25 and assigns the proceeds from the sale of a 20.472-acre parcel of land, property of the People of Puerto Rico, located in the Machuelo neighborhood of Ponce, to the fund created by Act 204 of 1942, Construirán Barriada. It is explained in the bill's explanatory statement that "having abandoned its purpose of building the District Hospital on the aforementioned parcel of land and therefore ceasing to be of public utility for said purpose and considering that the Municipal Authority of Ponce. It is in the best interests of the People of Puerto Rico to proceed with the sale of the aforementioned parcel of land to the said Authority, which sale is currently in process. Senate Bill No. 22, to amend Section 3 of Act 264, approved on April 3, 1946, which authorized the sale of a property in the Marina, in San Juan, and the use of its price for the construction of offices of the Department of the Interior, was also approved on third reading. Article 2 of said Act, as amended, validates all transactions and negotiations that the Commissioner of the Interior may have carried out with the proceeds obtained from the sale of the aforementioned property. Powers For the IAI Likewise, P. S. 78 was approved on third reading to amend Sections 2 and 3 of Act 85, approved in May 1945. which transferred to the Homes Authority the rights over houses, workingmen's neighborhoods, lots and urban hamlets held by the Safe Homes Division of the Department of Labor, conferring on the Homes Authority the rights and duties which have been vested in the Commissioner of the Interior over such neighborhoods, houses, lots and urban hamlets. Homage * Juann The Senate approved Joint Resolution number two, of the House of Representatives, "in recognition of the brilliant work performed by actor Juann Hernández abroad and his profound sense of the altruistic mission that is entrusted to an artist of our times within modern society." First Reading Before recessing, until four o'clock in the afternoon of Monday, the Senate considered the following bills, on first reading: S. P. 145, to amend Article One (1) of Act No. 200 approved on May 14, 1948. P. S. 146, to authorize the President of the Senate of Puerto Rico and the Speaker of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico to jointly grant a contract with the person or persons who have to install and manage a restaurant in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (Continued on page 16, Col. 5).
Judge Sets Date For Arraignment on Alien Fire Charges
and ol ceftalatplonto for reading came shortly after Judge Suarez Garriga declared without merit the habeas corpus filed by Miguel A. Palou requesting his release on the grounds that prosecutor Viera Martinez did not have probable cause to charge him with any public offense. * Despite having declared the habeas corpus petition inadmissible, with respect to the allegation of the lack of probable cause, the magistrate agreed to reduce to 862,000 the bail of 8230,000 that had originally been set at the time of the petition. Judgment Issued, In the judgment issued resolving the habeas cor petition (Continued on page 18, Col. 7)
The Chamber Will Receive in Plenary Session The Delegates to Guatemala Recognizes the Sports Work of the Boricuaa. The House of Representatives will also pay tribute to Juano Hernández The House of Representatives in plenary session will go to the airport on Sunday afternoon to welcome the Puerto Rican sports delegation that participated in the Sixth Central American and Caribbean Games. In yesterday morning's session of the House, upon being informed of a cablegram from* ---------- _ Rep.
Francisco Díaz Mar. chand, who presides over the Committee of the Legislature that is in Guatemala, the House adopted the agreement to go to the airport at 4:00 p. m. tomorrow, to give him the welcome. M, tomorrow, to welcome the Puerto Rican sports delegation upon its return from that country. The original motion was presented by Representative Augusto Valentín Vizcarrondo, who praised the merits of the Puerto Rican athletes who participated in the competitions and proposed the naming of a commission, and was amended by Representative 4'fonso Román García in the sense that all the representatives would attend to welcome the Puerto Rican athletes. Diaz Marchand's Cablegram Representative Diaz Marchand addressed to the Speaker of the House, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonin! the following cablegram: '"The splendid triumph of Puerto Rico over thirteen, brotherly competing countries took place without any kind of incidents and within the widest sportsmanship. The sports delegation of Puerto Rico recognizes the vigorous support given by the House of Representatives in making possible the sending of this delegation and asks me, which I do with pleasure, to be the bearer of the gratitude of all the participants and directors of this sports embassy to our House of Representatives. Greetings." The session of the House began at" 10:00 A. M. Upon reading a report and recommendation of the Health and Welfare Committee, Representative Manuel Acevedo Rosarlo proposed to summon the Commissioner of Health, upon his return to the Island, to explain to him the reasons for his decision and the reasons for his decision.
Aponte Clarifies Industrial Exemption Says Benefit Covers Subsidiaries of Parent Company Acting Attorney General Jose C. Aponte decided yesterday that as soon as "an industry has been granted a tax exemption, all industrial units it creates in the future are eligible for this benefit. Aponte issued this opinion in response to an inquiry from Mr. Robert M. Baker, director of the Industrial Tax Exemption Office. The Acting Chief Justice cited in his opinion Section 2-b of Act 184 of 1948, which refers to the industries eligible to receive the benefits of the tax exemption. Mr. Aponte explains that this section of the law "is not so clearly stated that its meaning can be grasped at once", but that he is of the opinion that the Legislature's intent was to extend the tax exemption benefit to the designated industry, and its units, subsequently created, "It is obvious", says Aponte, "that the intent of the Legislature, in stating that it was the intent of the Legislature, in its opinion, to extend the tax exemption benefit to the designated industry, and its units, subsequently created, were eligible for the tax exemption.
Mayor Signs Album. For Pío XÍI
F.- ■ W a E ■ y Here appears the Mayor of San Juan, Mrs." Felisa Rincón de Gautier, while signing an album that will be sent to His Holiness, Pope Pius XII, subscribed by distinguished Catholic personalities" of America, on the occasion of 1" celebration of the present Holy Year of 1959. Next to the Mayoress, Mr. Jose Alberto Rodriguez, from Ecuador, who prepares this alhum (Photo Government of the Capital, by Andréu).
Urbano Locked in the Urn where he will fast for 25 days.
loa |||M ¡íBMMn - W'''
We see here the Brazilian Urbano, enclosed in a crlatal urn, shortly after beginning his fast of 28 days and nights, at the National Theater of Santurce. Among those present were the Consul of Brazil, Mr. Waldemar Lee, Senator Ramon Barreto Perez, and
Senator Ramon Barreto Perez. I" Mrs. Elvira de Urbano; Mr. Eduardo Ruis Tnledo; our colleague Lulo Ránche" Cappa, and other representatives of the Press, the radio and the Insular Police. (Photo EL MUNDO).
Truman Asks for Powers 7 . ™
To Seize Mines Paralyzed By Strike
Sibert Praises Boricua Soldiers In Maneuvers Commander Of 'Aggressor Force' 9 Yesterday, Brigadier General Edwin L. Sibert, commander of the "Aggressor Force" that will defend Vieques from the attacks of an "Invader" force, yesterday praised the participation of the Puerto Rican soldiers in the Vieques maneuvers. He said the group of Puerto Rican soldiers is the only one "truly qualified to defend the island during the For. trex operations," the name given to the Vieques maneuvers this year. The Puerto Rican soldiers and the 33rd Infantry Battalion, from Panama, make up the "Aggressor Force" that will confront the "Invading Forces" of the United States that will try to take over the Island, according to a note received. These soldiers are participating in the largest aerial exercises carried out in peacetime since the end of the last war, under the command of General Sibert. Importance of the Borlcua Pointing out the importance of the participation of the Borlcua, General Sibert warned that they constitute the only unit of American soldiers" who speak" Idio. mas, "which adds more realism and interest to the maneuver itself." He explained that if a Puerto Rican soldier is "captured," which he said would not be very easy, the enemy would automatically be obliged to do his interrogations in Spanish if he wished to obtain any valuable information. Naturally, he would refrain from giving any information in English and "thus the language problem would provide the troops involved in the exercise with a much more effective and realistic training than any exercise of this nature has provided to date. In addition, the extensive knowledge of the combat tactics in the* ¡jungle and the familiarity with the area of maneuver" acquired by the" Borlcuan troops, during the past few months, "makes them logical opponents" for the" best" trn. pa" that may confront them during the exerciseólo." Localized Force" Despite the bad weather in the Atlantic, according to information from the" Portrex headquarters, Iss Force" Aggressor" defending 1" Island "located" an element of the" Invaders" force" and gave two strong blows. This action is part of the Portrex operations, which are reaching their climax, involving some 80,000 members of all the armed services of the United States. The "heavy" swell and poor visibility affected the "submarines" of the "defending forces. Meanwhile, "in Puerto Rico (Continued on Page 16--Col. 5)
Senate Committee Approves Two Reform Plans The Special Committee of the Senate on Government Reorganization Programs, submitted" " I" Leglelatur" by the Governor, agreed "," I" Leglelatur" by the Governor, agreed ", I" Leglelatur" by the Governor, agreed ", I" Leglelatur" by the Governor, agreed ", I" Leglelatur" by the Governor. "lor, agreed ",yer to recommend favorably lo" orogr". mas under titles one and two. The first of these pro. grams is that concerning 1" reorganization of the "lepar, tomento of Agriculture and Commerce; the second, to I" Co. mission of Fnrques and (ecrans. The Chairman of the Committee, Senator Heracho Rivera Colón, informed that notwithstanding 1" favorable recommendation of both" bills", the Senate will not do so until all" eleven bills" have been duly studied.
The Committee will meet again next Tuesday at nine o'clock in the morning.
State Denies Entry Group Of Europeans Claims Alleged Pro-Peace Delegation Is Of Red Character* By JOHN L. STEELE WASHINGTON, March 3. (PU)The State Department, with congressional approval, today denied entry to the United States to a red-tinged European delegation, which wanted to bring a plea for "peace" to Capitol Hill. The Department denied a twelve-man delegation from the World Congress of Supporters of Peace, which it called "the leading Communist front organization in the world. The group included the Reverend Hewlett Johnson, the "red dean" of Canterbury, and Pahlo Picasso, the famous Spanish artist, The" American "functionaries" said the delegation's plan to petition Congress for the pro "crition of atomic weapons was a Communist propaganda stunt to take advantage of"" the growing public sentiment in the United States to accept "honest"" peace proposals. Delegate" Communists "Lo" twelve delegate"", the Deparlamento said, "are comurtist" and are therefore stUcfo" r exclusion from the United States under the Immigration laws." The Department took the exceptional step of announcing that the visas would be denied, even before" the formal application was made. The" officials" said they wanted to end the "peace" movement by Ir delegation, before" the public was "educated. Congressional leaders, who were consulted Wednesday on the issue, quickly endorsed the Department's action. Tom Connally, Democrat of Texas, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations" Committee, "uglrllrl that the delegation make its pe-, tlclone of peace to Moscow and not to Esta-' two United States. "Those are troublemakers trying to sow dissension. Infiltrating propaganda and annoying," he said. "They are enemies of the United" States, enemy" of the American people," Others Comment Democratic Senate leader Scott W, Lúea", and Republican leader Kenneth S. Wheery, said they heartily approved of 1| Department action. Meanwhile, some lawmakers made new demands that President Truman make one more effort to reach an understanding with Moscow on the controls (Continued on Page 16-Col. 3) 1
By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA EL MUNDO Staff Writer Next week, in the United States, Mr. Jorge Benitez Gautier, regional director of the National Housing Accelerator Office, will confer with Mr. Tighe Woods, head of that agency in Washington, D.C., on the future of the federal control program on the island. Mr. Benitez Gautier revealed yesterday to EL MUNDO that he has been summoned by Mr. Woods, National Housing Accelerator, for an interview to be held next Wednesday in Atlanta, Georgia. The agency's island official will leave for the mainland next Tuesday. It is possible that, as a result of
Sends a Message to the Chambers and Notes Crisis Conditions in Various Parts of the Nation.' By ROBERT B I.EE : . WASHINGTON, Mar. 3. (PU)-. President Truman today asked Congress for immediate authority to seize and operate coal until John L. Lewis and the producers secure sufficient fuel to meet their needs. - The President sent a special message to the House and Senate, in which he expressed the hope that Lewis and the producers could reach an agreement on a salt contract which would end the crippling strike, before it became necessary to "truly. I derly" it becomes necessary for the Government to seize the" mi. na". L. Cole, Chairman of the Board of Inquiry appointed by Trumin to settle the coal strike, said tonight that John L. Lends and the bituminous coal mine owners reached agreement on the principle of a new contract. Cole added that a committee composed of members" of the coal, coal and employer" will meet tomorrow to draw up the new contract. "There are still a number of details to be worked out," he added, implying that there are "some legal difficulties" involved. Mr. Truman stressed that he had decided on seizure as the last alternative and only after it became apparent that the court orders would not send the 370,000 Lewis miners back to work. Senate Democratic leader Scott W. Lucas of Illinois promised to give the President's request the quickest possible action. He said the Senate may "meet tomorrow to consider the request. He predicted that a seizure bill could be passed by Saturday night. Mr. Truman submitted an outline of his proposed bill with his message. This draft would give him!" Seizure powers until June 30, 1951. He plans to cover the coal and coal industries, although there is no indication that the President intends to seize the anthracite mines. The President said the Govt. would not draw up a contract with the miners -something a number of united miners would like to see 41 ; done. But he pressed for the establishment of two partial boards - one to recommend "reasonable and just compensation" for the miners for the use of their land, and the other to see that the miners receive "reasonable and just compensation" for the use of their land, and the other to see that the miners receive "reasonable and just compensation" for the use of their land, and the other to see that the miners receive "reasonable and just compensation" for the use of their land. I ñero" receive "reasonable and just compensation" for their trabéJ®- * - Z J Mr. Truman said that the* mine" would be returned to their owners. Mr. Truman said the mines would be returned to their owners "when the pal" could be assured of a sufficient stock of coal. As coal supplies are "hour," he said, "in a few days" we will be virtually without any coal." The President emphasized that he did not speak suggested di* Seizure legislation as a means of dictating term" of settlement for the con. deals to Lewl" and 1o" producers. "They will have to settle their differences through their own collective bargaining, eomo ■! the Government's operation would not eatu-' viera in effect,"-he said. "I do not ma propose to substitute with the Government's repra. "entente" of the Government to the private" opeé radore", at the d< conference table. "* Many miners"-turn said that" They would go to the mines again, bá. jo the Seizure of "good tt n d "l Government, in which the profits* of the mining operations would go to the )Contlnued on Pg. 16 Co! 4)
Tighe Woods to Discuss Federal Revenue Control for the Island
This conference will discuss whether to discontinue or continue federal rent control, in light of the current congressional debate, and the situation regarding the administration of the federal rent statute. As is known, the agency's funds were reduced in the congressional session of April 1949 and were almost exhausted early this year, raising the possibility that the agency might be prevented from continuing to administer the law. An additional appropriation was requested from Congress, while on the other hand, savings were made which will enable it to continue to function until next May, at least. (Continued "n Page 16-CoL 2)