THE VWUl WORLD
Caguas - Guayama Wins Governor's Cup by beating Indios, 2 - 0
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR IRLA, TODAY: - Generally cloudy, with a few scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, MR degrees; low, SI degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:00 p.m., 79.91 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Feb. 17. £PÜ). -Today afternoon m recorded thea alguientaa temperature": New York, 40; Chicago. 55; Wáahlng+on, 55; Miami, 07 Predlcdoneet Weather mostly sunny. Temperature mine high ds 40 to 40 degrees*.
TOMORROW'S DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY FEBRUARY 18, 1950
NUMBER 13935
FIVE CENTS
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office. San .luán, P R
Supreme Court Prosecutor Initiates Investigation ; On the Release from Prison of Lucas Castro Anguita.
W ■ I P wfW *- "f JWnRIyy wf/w IL t W 9 & jS / w Ws",¿5" - jf 1 a &SoPw i a wsbsma i m Mi .Wtitev f ; y _ "' ' ' : '■HIr 1¿w r iLrlMrffr ■.' *. ' v: '■ ' f Yesterday encouraged InvMInra* I* derad" demor" in the excarcelainlenh" of the wftor "í?" was ordered by the Supreme Court. The flacal of the Supreme, Lic. J"\* qulerda), Interrogates the mayor of 1* Jail of Dhfrlto de San Juan, aefior Bal bino At the center, the stenographer of the "acal, aefior Joaé M. Blrrlel Barreto. (Fotor""* of EL MUNDO).
Roberto V argas Won Again From Taponero Replaced in the Seventh A Renta To Achieve Champions 4 9 Run MAYAGUE& fabraro 17. (By Salvador E. Fabón) - At last! The eampeonea Criollos del Ca-guai-Guayama, with the sympathies of practically the "rueso of the fanatleada d" Puerto Rico, won today the Serle by the Copa Gobernar dor. despula of Imponerse in the regular tournament and hetir the opposition of Ponce in the first post-season serle. Only 713 people saw the Criollos qualify for the Caribbean Series this afternoon, as they won the first four games of the series, defeating the Mayagüez Indians, 2-0. It was a dramatic contest in which Wilmer Fields did not allow a single hit to the winners and Fields himself failed in the dutch with the lumber on his shoulder; Roberto Vargas reappeared on the mound for the third time in the Serle, to score his second victory; and a humble and delayed Podro Alomar connecting the decisive hit in the vital Serle with the Indians, as he did in the game against Santurre, in which the Criollos won the Insular championship. During the first six innings, rookie Lula Renta and import Wilmer Fields held a fierce duel of pitchers, with the giant Indio on another apparent path to a no-hitter against CaguasGuayama, but the no-hitter was broken when Roy Hughes, the first batter in the seventh inning, hit a triple. Hughes, however, Tin was able to score because Tetelo passed away from third to first and Olmo hit a ground ball to first, and the double play was completed when the Jos Criollos' shortstop wanted to reach the plate with the throw to first. In the second half of that same inning, Mayagüez threatened to break the scoreless game. Johnny Davis received a free ticket to open the episode, and advanced to second with Carlos Manuel Santiago's single to the right field. It was then that the Criollos' Bombero came in to pitch, who promptly forced Fields to ground into a double play from second to first. Davls advanced to third on the play, but continued to his position in the left field when Vlllodas died with a line out to Olmo. (Cont. on P. 15, Col. R)
First Witnesses Interrogated In Capital District Jail. Prosecutor Viera Called to Justice By JOSE M. GARCIA CALDERON Editor of" EL MUNDO The prosecutor of the Supreme Court, Lic. José Rivera Barreras, and the Court Administrator, Lic. Angel Vázquez Tébar, began to investigate simultaneously yesterday morning the alleged obstruction offered by some officials to delay last Wednesday the execution of a release order issued in favor of Lucas Castro Anguita.
The two officials in charge of the investigation of this incident, which was said to be "extremely serious", questioned yesterday Mr. Felix Ochotecn and the Secretary of the Supreme Court, Mr. Ignacio Rivera, as well as the prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez, the district jail officials Balblno González, José B. Negrón, P. Roldén and the inmate Antonio Guzmán Rivera. According to what was reported yesterday, the Clerk of the Court confirmed in its entirety the report that Mr. Ochoteco officially rendered on what happened while trying to comply with the release order issued in favor of Lucas Castro. The first person to be called to testify in relation to this incident was Mr. Ochoteco and shortly thereafter Mr. Rivera. Viera in Jnstlcja Prosecutor Viera Martinez was called in the early morning hours to the Justice Department where he deposed before the Corles Administrator and later appeared before the Supreme Court prosecutor. As it is known, Mr. Ochoteco described what happened to prevent the execution of the release order in favor of Lucas Castro, as "a desecration to the dignity of the Supreme Court, never seen by me in my career as a lawyer". These words of Mr. Ochoteco went into the record in the district court, and subsequently the drowned man rendered an information of facts to the Court, resulting in the instructions of Judge Angel R. de Jesus and the Attorney General for the investigation to be carried out immediately. Both the prosecutor Barrera" and the Court Administrator, attorney Angel Vázquez Tébar, said yesterday that they expected to finish the work entrusted to them next Monday. Last Witness Remaining to (Continued on p. 14, Col. 7)
Bishop Davis Attacks Divorce Measure Says Liberalization Would Further Crack Foundations of Society The Bishop of the Diocese of San Juan, Monsignor Davis, yesterday declared himself opposed to the liberalization of the divorce laws being pursued by House Bills 11 and 12, which were introduced in the House of Representatives, said His Illustrisima that "the liberalization of the laws of divorce, destructive in itself of the stability and permanence of the family, will only serve to officially stimulate and legalize free love, thus cracking even more the already quite decayed" foundations of the institution of marriage and of "marriage in Puerto Rico." The statements of Bishop Davls continue: "The presentation in the House of Representatives of Bills 11 and 12 should cause no one any surprise. One of these bills proposes to establish divorce by mutual consent of the spouses; the other lowers to only one month the requirement of residency on the Island to be able to file for divorce. Both" are the logical conclusion of the marriage laws in force in Puerto Rico. "Once divorce is implemented and favored in our code, the rest comes as a matter of course. Nevertheless, it is to be expected that the legislators will take into account that "sector of public opinion which, aware of the disastrous" consequences" of the same, repudiates it (Continued on p. 14 Col. 7),
Passing Through the Island
Former Policeman Kills Mother Believing "It Was Best" JOLIET, Illinois, February 17, (pu)~Ixm surgeons" were struggling today to save the life of a former policeman who killed his mother because she "would be better off" dead, and then made an attempt on his own life. Fifty-three-year-old Walter Schlim was found near his mother's body in a hotel room. He begged "the officers to let him die while he was being taken to the hospital. Police Chief Irvlng Rnwe said the investigation had not clarified the mo. shot of the murder. Rchllmm. ea-state policeman and former prison guard, was in serious condition with hala wounds to the chest after Naher murdered his mother, octogenarian Lena Bchllmm. Bowe said Rchlimin told him he feared his mother was losing her mouse.
Muñoz Marin Submits Plans To Reorganize Government; Requests Increased Authority
Seven native banks have been admitted as members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, having been presented with diplomas accrediting them as such in a ceremony held yesterday afternoon at La Fortaleza. By becoming members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, Crédito y Ahorro Poncefto, Raneo de Ponce, Credit Union Bank, Roig Commercial Bank, Banco de San Germán and Banco de Economía y Préstamos, their depositors will have their deposits insured up to the amount of five thousand dollars. Governor Luis Muñoz Marín, the treasurer, Sol Lula Descartes and the seftore" Rafael Carrión, Miguel Such and Angel Sanz, spoke at the ceremony, which took place in the afternoon in Fortaleza.
Former Governor Roosevelt's Widow Visits San Juan on Virgin Islands Trip
By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Yesterday the widow of the late Governor Theodore Roosevelt, son, former Governor of Puerto Rico who called himself El Jibaro de Fortaleza, passed through San Juan. The visit of this lady was a cause of confusion yesterday at the airport in Isia Grande, since, as she bears the same name as the widow of the late President Franklin Franklin Franklin Daniel Roosevelt, Eleanor Roosevelt, I expected her to be the lady visitor. The widow of the ex-governor Teddy Roosevelt continued yesterday to the Virgin Islands, accompanied by her daughter, Mrs. William McMlller, where they plan to spend a season of rest. Numerous journalists, photographers and cameramen went to the airport to welcome Mrs. Roosevelt, who was expected since 7:00 in the morning. Colonel Alberto Arrlllaga was there to receive her on behalf of the Governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Lula Muñoz Marin. Since the arrival of the plane was announced
flight 215, all of us at the airport were in great expectation. The desire and interest of the journalists in not missing a single detail of the arrival, made us get close to the plane itself, next to the stairs, ready to act at the right time. The reporters with their notebooks and the photographers with their cameras anxiously watched the disembarkation of each and every one of the passengers. They all disembarked, at last, but among them was not the widow of the late President Roosevelt, whom we were expecting. "There is no one else on board," shouted the pilot, but none of us believed him. Colonel Arrlllaga and some of us journalists went aboard in search of our visitor. All in vain. They showed us the passenger list, and there was the name of Eleanor B. Rooaovelt. Rooaovelt. Another suspicious glance at the plane, and nothing. By ftn Colonel Arrlllaga was able to ascertain that the expected visitor was not President Roosevelt's widow, and ".....
President Roosevelt, and "! of another no less distinguished, that of former Governor Toedoro Roosevelt, Jr. El Jibaro de Fortaleza El Jibaro de Fortaleza, as Teddy Roosevelt called himself, was Governor of Puerto Rico from 1931 to 1932. He distinguished himself essentially by two details of human interest: because whenever he was seen in public he always wore a broad smile, and because he liked to identify himself with our peasants by going up the mountains on horseback. Because of his policy of identification with the poor and peasant masses, he called himself "the jibaro of Fortaleza". He later served "his country during the Second World War, dying in his camp in France in 1945. He held the rank of General. Ru father, was chief of the famous Cavalry Patrols that so much famKjdquirleron "u participation in the Spanish-American War, in Cuba. He was later exalted to the Presidency of the United States.
Sends Message To Legislators Stresses Must Provide Necessary Personnel. Further Reforms By M. NIEVES RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The Governor, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, in submitting yesterday to the Legislature his eleven plans for the reorganization of the Island Government, sent a message in which he stated that they constitute "the first achievement of the effort to achieve the best organization of the Island Government, in tune with the new constitutional framework in which its operations are carried out". The text of the message sent by the Governor to the Legislature yesterday afternoon is as follows: "The reorganization plans that I submit to the consideration of the Legislature constitute the first achievement of the effort in which we have endeavored to improve the organization and procedures of the Government of Puerto Rico, in tune with the new constitutional framework in which its operations are carried out, "In submitting to the people and their legislators this report on such an important aspect of our economy, "it is indeclinable to acknowledge that we have made an effort to improve the organization and procedures of the Government of Puerto Rico, in tune with the new constitutional framework in which its operations are carried out. It is imperative that we recognize that the remarkable progress made to date in the recovery process has been made possible by the effective cooperation of the Legislature and the Executive. Mutual Trust "It is truly an example of mutual trust, which strengthens the democratic basis of our political system in all its aspects, making it efficient and representative in the formulation and execution of its programs. "Law Number 140 of April 29, 1949 authorized the beginning of the executive reorganization. In accordance with its provisions, I appointed a commission composed of seven citizens with ample experience in the problems of public administration: James H. Rowe, president; Louis Brownlow, Benjamin Ortiz, Luis Negrón López, Rafael Picó, Manuel Af Pérez and Enrique Córdova Díaz. / On October 17, 1949, the committee rendered its report, with specific recommendations, which re(Continued on page 14, Col. R)
New York City Coal Rationed
Up to $ÜJ)0b.00 Deposits in Seven Native Banks Insured
Governor Muñoz Marín, in presenting the diplomas to the directors of the aforementioned banking institutions, said that the admission of the aforementioned native banks was "an invaluable recognition of the solvency, liquidity and good administration of the banks. Treasurer Descartes referred to the admission as "another jiaso of advancement in the task rio integrate nue". our economy to the strong and growing economy of the continental United States" delivery." Rafael Carrión, president of Banco Popular, said that "this step forward puts local banking on an equal footing with that of the Continent, becoming an integral part of the banking system of the United States".
Reserve Reported* For Less Than 1 Week. (PU) - The fourteen million inhabitants of New York state tonight expected a system of coal rationing as a prelude to a partial brownout and other emergency measures to economize the dangerously low coal reserves. Controls on the stocks of stone coal and bituminous coal begin to take effect at midnight, bnjo emergency powers conferred on the state Fuel Administrator, Bertram D. Tallamy, pnT Governor Thomas । E. Dewey and by the Legislature. I It was reported that in populous New York clu- ; dity people were searching for anthracite, while residents of the state's northern delivery, rejoicing in mild temperatures, appeared to be taking -the coal rationing order in stride. The full impact of the five rationing orders will not be felt until Sunday night when the city's Great White Way and its replicas in sixty-one other cities will be partially blacked out. In the meantime, Tallamy declared that he is talking about one week's reserves for monkeys in the hands of the wholesalers". He issued his report after a "total" inventory of bituminous coal stocks. The stock of anthracite coal, he said, was two weeks' worth. Although the recreation sites and other 1 -(Continued on p. 14, Col. 2)
" - 4 Friend of Gandhi Estu vo Yesterday at IBM Island M SWBwMi ® IpJ; An Immigration clerk res ises the passport of Hindu Typhew Trt- | lok, at the airport do Island pulling. Trlíok, a native of the island of Cyprus, came to America from Calcutta. India, to visit a daughter in Botanical Guiana (Photo EL MUNDO).
A rich Indian was an attraction at the airport.
He tried to get money from Calcutta. He came from Calcutta, India By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor of F.I. MUNDO An elderly and wealthy merchant from the island of Cyprus was yesterday the center of attention at the Grand Isle airport while waiting for a plane to take him to British Guiana. By his manner of dress and "his great resemblance to Mahatma Ghandi, of whom he said he was a personal friend, Typhew Trilok quickly became the attraction of all passengers and visitors" who spoke yesterday morning at the airport. Speaking in a language all his own that seemed to be a mixture of Spanish, English-Hindi, or Greek, Trilok said he was on his way to British Guiana to visit a daughter he had not seen for many years. He said he wanted to stay with her for a few days before leaving this world "and meet the Mahatmah. It was not possible to understand his daughter's name because of its strange pronunciation and because he could not write it, since he could neither read nor write. He comes from Calcutta Typhew Trilok, who was visas in Calcutta, India, last February 9, leaving on a Pan American plane, via London, New York and San Juan. He was born in Cyprus, envoi 1870, as stated in the passport. (Continued on In p. 14, Col. 6)
' Bk 9 Hb HL r J A i
The military aide to the governor, Col. Alberto Arrlllaga, talks with Mrs. William McMlller, widow of former Puerto Rican Governor Teddy Roosevelt, and her daughter, Mrs. William McMlller, on their arrival in the island yesterday on a Pan American plane on their way to the Virgin Islands. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Several Offices Transferred# Announcement Oró ConfiiRÍón And Senate Debate. Commissions Will Study By S. GÁIATE MATUIIANA Editor of EL MUNDO Governor Muñoz Marín "". put "yer t "rde " 1" Legislative Assembly eleven programs d" reorgnnlz.Rción d*1 Insular Government, in tune with the recommendations which 1* were made by 1" Special Commission appointed to) effect by him - At" twelve thirty-five mi" null" of the afternoon the Chairman, Samuel R. Quiñones, reported "1 Senate having received a message from Governor Muñoz Marín, accompanying the eleven programs of re- ' organization to be considered by 1" legislature. Immediately e1 vlrepresl(i*n. 4 the Senate suggested to the President the appointment of a" Special Commission, which would be in charge of making a study of the one" proRi "mas. suggesting that said Special Commission would be "Composed of the" Presidents of those" Commissions" that had to do with the" different" programs included" in the reorganization. ( Confualón Momentary i-*-j For the moment there was elert" eon* *" fusion between several" "enadore" pre - i "ente", who understood that the eleven program" ri" reorganization Jdebían sor puesto" "nt" 1" ennal* deración de todos y rada uno d" lo." senadorc". y no de un Comité $ | | Special. . J.. The following intervened in the debate: i. senator"" Lionel Fernandez J4*ndez, Ernesto Carrasquillo, Celestina | Triarte, Samuel R. Quiñones, and e| Vice Chairman, Negron IZp*z. "Aelsrado debidamente por el Presidente" qu* lodos loa senadore" would have intervention "n 1" eonsi-í riernción d" tales programas a* * proceeded to appoint a" Comisión! Speci"!", lnt "gr "ri" by lo" senate* rea following: Francisco L, AnseJsh > mi, Ramón Barreto Pérez, Carrasquillo, Victor Gutiérrez Fran<¿ qui, Celestino Triarte, Lula A. Ne<' grón López, Cruz Ortiz Stella. Bo-4" llvar Pagán and Heracllo H. Rlvera Colón. Celestino Triarte took the opportunity of his inclusion in the Special Commission to announce that he regretted that because the Governor had not included minority representation in the Special Commission that made the recommendations, he would now have to study each and every one of the programs. He referred to the fact that the minority had not been represented, because the appointment of Enrique Córdov Díaz as a member of the Commission was not consulted by the State Party. He also said that no one could prevent all and each one of the senators from participating in the reorganization programs, because all of them would have to be asked at the end of the meeting, And my son Pep", how is he" < , The President replied that "all" would have to participate in the projects to be presented, and "stmlsmq * insisted that the" minority" egtu- -" ! vician represented" in the Reorganization Commission, in 1" per- f* l son" of Mr. Córdava Díaz. The Incident ended and the aforementioned Commission was appointed, the Senate recessed until Monday, June next. ' p In 1" House" The" eleven plans d" reorganiza- ' I cation of the Gov't submitted" yesterday to *J' the House" Legislative" will pass ü to the Irtsulaz I Comls/>n of Government of 1" House of Replantswhose members will be increased j to eleven to" efficiently attend to this work. With the plans, the Governor submitted a general message and a special message for each one, and the House of Representatives agreed, on motion of Representative 1 Arcillo Alvarado, that once the plans were printed, they should go to the 1" Committee on Insular Government, which requested that their original number of 7 " 11 be increased to efficiently attend to the work involved in the consideration of the reorganization plans. The eleven plans submitted yesterday are the "L. Plan Number T: Transfers to the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, the Agricultural Company, the Land Authority's Administration of Social Programs, the Bureau of Cooperatives, the Board of Appeals of Cooperatives, and the foundations of the Coffee Insurance Corporation, the Coffee Industry Rehabilitation Commission, and the Coffee Industry Advisory Board. Pian Number 2: Creates the Admlnlg. (Continued on Page 14-Col 1)
Senate Acts on Fomento Delay
Ortiz Stella Says It Is Disrespectful Morcoro Claims Criticism Is Unfounded. An alleged apathy on the part of the government agencies, in relation to the requests made by the Senate for better information, was the cause of a heated debate in the Senate floor yesterday. Senator Cruz Ortiz Stella, referring to an information requested by him to the Development Company, in relation to the Caribe Hilton Hotel, since the last extraordinary session, said that the same was not provided to him and that "it was disrespectful to the Senate" that said information was provided to a newspaper that published it. He requested that the Secretary of the Senate be ordered to go to said agency and request the information requested by him. Heracllo Rivera Colón opposed Senator Ortiz Stella's motion, believing that the Senate should not be forced to take such action, since, according to his criteria, the responsible official could be summoned and, if necessary, taken to the floor to report to the Senate, Other senators intervened in the controversy, expressing their support for the Industrial Development Company, through its employees, to go to the Senate and not this legislative body to send personal emissaries to obtain information. Finally, the Chairman, Samuel R. Quiñón*", intervened, approving a motion by Senator Ortiz Stella himself to request the Development Company to send the required information, giving it a week's time to do so. Said request shall be personally processed by the Secretary of the Senate. Under the chairmanship of Senator Samuel R. Quiñones, three motions were approved yesterday by the Senate. Senator Barreto Pérez requested that the Attorney General be asked for a report on] the number of persons detained" at the Presidio Insular. How many" of those" persons" are serving determinate sentences, and how many" Indeterminate". He further requested that he be informed how many of the inmates serving indeterminate sentences are serving indeterminate sentences (Continued on p. 14. Col. 5).