THE NfiNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: - Partly cloudy with scattered showers in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: - High, 86 degrees; low, 75 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:00 p.m., 29.93 inches of mercury. \
NEW YORK, Sept. 22. (PU)~ * The following temperatures were recorded this afternoon: New York, M¡ Chicago, 67; Washington, 68; Miami, 85. Highest temperature, 76 degrees.
MARAÑA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH EUABC CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juíil. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO -SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 23, 1950
NUMBER 14149 FIVE CENTAVOS
U.S. Army Troops Reconquer Suwon; South Koreans Sweep Toward 38th Parallel ?> - l ■rvx" and . ■ . . j, ' '/ . * /■--■ , "j * *- . X , / > - - ♦ £ , ■ - < ; f A 2 ' '
*" KOREA . A zaKaSKSro c?** iJkw gByiWK^*5W* / 1 'krvvatemchok Utjn' / tW<a SOUTH - "orea \ KuntangKtí Jf *"*- s"" ''WS¿2¡táK£jfate' :4vfKusan u f' M O . "* í í í-n Jf 9 *9 *9 <-♦' '\ m TolldM arrows mark Ion Allied thrusts at the Naktong and Pusan River beachhead, South Korea, on September 31, when United Nations troops attempted to cross the lines ine" look in their thrust toward Kumchon (broken arrow) and toward Seoul. Despite the Red retreats, the enemy continued to resist in some places (open arrows). The greatest advances were made in the north, where the South Koreans made a push of twenty miles beyond Yongchon. To the north of Taegu, plnsas were closing on a trapped Red unit in the Tabu area. The Allies were extending their bridge basins on the Naktong River with thrusts to Songju and Chogye, and the only enemy bridge basin at Hypongpung was being reduced. (Photo by P. A.) The Chambers Recessed Sine Die Without Amending Referendum Law -, .-. -. ■ - Munoz Had Extended Convocation, To That End. Muñoz Marin said he had extended the call for the extraordinary session of the Legislature to authorize the amendment of the Referendum Law so that it would not be necessary to show a birth certificate when registering as a citizen.
Judge Declares 14 Bolita Caguas Convicts Dismissed Motions Filed by Defense. Monday, September 22 (By Andres Martinez Garcia) - Fourteen people accused of violating the Bolita Law were found guilty this afternoon by Judge Joie Vlllarea Rodriguez, of the Caguas Section of the Puerto Rico District Court. The convicts are Lull Pierai Zeragona, Sotero Martínez Grillo, Lula Montafiez Villegai, Juan Valentin Valentin, Franclico Rivera Guzmán, Antonio Rodríguez Rodríguez Rodríguez, Crlipulo González Cruz, Eufemio Claudio Claudio, Manuel Delgado Jiménez, Fernando Dávila Rodríguez, Frenético Miranda Fraguada, Arturo Solí Rodríguez, Serafín Torrea Rivera, Serafín Torrea Rivera, Serafín Torrea Rivera, Antonio Rodríguez Rodríguez Rodríguez, Crlipulo González Cruz, Eufemio Claudio Claudio, Manuel Delgado Jiménez, Fernando Dávila Rodríguez, Frenético Miranda Fraguada, Arturo Solí Rodríguez. Serafín Torrea Rivera and Bernardo Colón Rolarlo. All of them were tried at the Caguaa Section of the Diatrlto Court, during a trial that lasted 4 days and one night, from September 11 to 14. Judge Vlllarei Rodriguez ordered the convict to be remanded to the Humacao District Jail until next Monday, at 9:00 a.m., when he will be taken again before said magistrate's office for sentencing. Teetigo del Pueblo A todog ae lea acuaó de intervenir con material de bolita, en la realdencla de Franclacp Ruiz del Valle, alta en el número 26 de 1a calle Camplo Alomo, en el corazón de esta ciudad. Ruiz del Valle, duefio of the caaa that was raided by the Eacuadrón contra el Vicio de la Zona Metropolitana de San Juan and where they were arreatadoa all the convlc(Contlnúa en la página 12 Col. 5)
voter to take part in the 1 Constitution elections. It was explained, that several persons .who are qualified electors, with the age required by law, would not be able to Register because they are ignorant of the town in which they were born, or would find it very difficult to obtain the birth certificate, having to apply for it from various towns where they might have been registered by their parents. The Legislature ended its work last night without taking action on the amendments to Section 17 of the referendum bill, submitted by the Governor in an extension to the call for referendum yesterday afternoon. The amendments will be studied by the joint House-Senate Committee which studied and drafted the referendum law, and will then submit a report to the Governor for him to reconvene the Legislature, which action is scheduled for next week. Before recessing, the Senate approved House Joint Resolution number 3, to request the 4th Labor Committee of the House of Representatives, the U.S. Senate and the Federal Department of Labor, to carry out as soon as possible a study and investigation of the form and working conditions of agricultural labor in Puerto Rico, for the purpose of recommending to Congress the approval of an amendment, if necessary, to the Social Security Law to extend its benefits to the Island's agricultural workers. He also said that the demographic records were not established with real efficiency until 1931, and many loyal voters would lose the right to express their opinion with respect to the Social Security Act, and that the Social Security Act should be amended, if necessary, to extend its benefits to the agricultural workers of the Island.
U.S. Asks to Discuss Formosa Case Austin Says Complaints Must Be Heard. By RICHARD WITKIN FLUSHING, New York, September 22.(FU)-The United States, acting with bold insistence, laid out its Formosa policy before the United Nations General Assembly. Our delegates invited the Assembly to discuss the Russian complaint against alleged American aggression against Communist China. The dispatch of the Seventh Fleet in Formosan waters and the bombing of targets in Manchuria have been cited by the Soviet as specific instances of "aggression". Only the Chinese Nationalist delegate (Dr. Tingfu F. Tslang) voted in the negative when the luue was sent to the Helm Committee for intense debate. U.S. delegate Warren R. Austin told the powerful Steering Committee that the United States sincerely believes that every grievance should be heard. His action eased the tension in this Assembly, which has gotten off to an extraordinarily rare start. The expected U.S.-Russian clash over the U.S. counterproposal regarding Formosa-which the Assembly is dealing with (Continued on page 14 col. 1)
Alvarez Willing to Hand Over Voter's Card Holder
By BURICO E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The Municipal Auditor of Rio Piedras, Soflor Frank Santiago Brito, in whose custody as secretary of the Local Committee of the Popular Party, is the voters' card holder corresponding to the 1948 elections, told EL MUNDO yesterday that it is at the disposal of the leadership of the Popular Party at any time. The voter card book, which consists of 36,000 cards that include all the voters of Rio Piedras, is located in one of the offices of the municipality, in perfect alphabetical order, according to Mr. Brito. Yesterday it was rumored that high officials of the Popular Party would have gone to the Municipality of Rio Piedras to request from the municipal authorities, and if necessary from former Mayor Alvarez, the delivery of the referred card holder. As of
t twelve o'clock in the morning, no official of the "Popular" Party showed up to pick up these documents. Other Rumors It was also rumored that ol oxalcaldo Alvares would have eponorso to be delivered ol same. However, ol soflor Alvares was questioned on the matter, and expressed that "if the card holder had been requested, at any time they would have obtained it, but as far as I know, it has not been requested." He added that "there is no reason not to deliver it. I consider that this card holder, which is in very good condition, is already obsolete for any future electoral census, since it corresponds to the year 1948, that is, two years ago, which means numerous changes of residence of a great majority of the voters.
Y Pato de v \a Luna > / í 1. * ) s * X I / <0 7 £ste Dr. Facundo Bueoo, author of the drawing, explained it as follows: The small circle represented the moon, and the large circle the shadow of the earth (umbra). The vertical line is the weight of the moon from west to east. Point A represents the first contact of the moon with the umbra, at 10:00 F. M.; point B represents the beginning of totality of the eclipse, at 11:54 F. M.; point C, represents the end of totality, at U:40 A. M.; and point D, the last point of totality, at U:40 A. M. and point D, the last contact of the moon with the umbra, at 3:03 A. M,
- ... y
American Marine infantrymen advance along an Inchon road toward Seoul to join the forces fighting for the liberation of the South Korean capital. An enemy tank put out of action, on which appears the body of one of its crew members.
one of its crew, blocks the center of the road. Marines were fighting fiercely at the gates of Reoul, while an unidentified red column was descending from the iron- * tera Manchurians toward that cludd. (Associated Press photo).
Social Security For Drivers To Benefit 30,000 On Island Agency Reminds That Group And Employers Of Obligation To Comply With New Law By Lulo Sanchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer About 30,000 drivers in Puerto Rico will eventually benefit from Law Number 428 of May 1950, as amended, which established social security for drivers. Ramon S. Eorastlerl, director of the Division of Social Security for Drivers, informed this yesterday.
The Department of Labor's Division of Social Security for Drivers. In an interview with the newspaper yesterday, Mr. Eorastlerl revealed that his agenda is being addressed to all drivers, persons and entities that employ drivers, and drivers who are their own employers, reminding them of their obligation to comply with the law. Is their obligation to comply with the aforementioned statute. Sixty Cents . The law, as amended, provides that "every employer who employs drivers is obliged to withhold from the wages earned by each driver, the amount of 30 cents per week, and at the same time contribute an equal amount for each driver he employs. This sum, amounting to 60 cents per week, is to be paid to the Treasurer of Puerto Rico for remittance to the Social Security Fund for Chófereí'. The law covers any employer who employs one or more drivers, whether in business, industry or private enterprise. Both these, as well as the employed drivers, and the ones who are employed by their own employers, must contribute to the fund, the latter will contribute only 30 cents per week. Contributions to the fund began at the end of last August, and according to Foraatierl, as of yesterday approximately 500 drivers had been insured. It is estimated that by the end of the first year of operation of the insurance fund the fund will have amounted to a sum of (Continued on p. 14 Col. 8)
Muñoz Approved New Funds * 1 For Appraisal Appropriation Now Rises To 83,378,740.Signs Other Bills ''V* - The Governor signed yesterday, eonvirtléndolo into law number one of eita extraordinary injury, House Bill number one, which appropriates the sum of 81,138,740 to continue the project of cadastre, classification and scientific appraisal of property. So far, $3,378,740< is the amount of money appropriated for this work. The original allocation was $1,200,000. In the regular session of the Legislature earlier this year an additional $1,000,000 was appropriated, which the sum of $1,178,740 just added yesterday, brings the total to $3,378,740. There is now a belief that the new allocation of $1,178,740 will complete the project and will have, "in addition to the cost of the project, a more accurate estimate of the cost of the work.
House Passes Anti-Red Veto Bill By Vetoing It, Truman Had Asked Congress Not To Pass It Again WASHINGTON, Sept. 22-(PU) - President Truman vetoed the anti-communism bill. The House of Representatives passed the communist control bill over the President's veto, 286 votes to 48, or 68 votes more than the necessary two-thirds majority. The Senate is expected to do the same. x Congress also passed a resolution to recess tomorrow until November 27, so that its members will have a chance to campaign in the congressional elections. In a 5,500-word message explaining his veto, the President says he believes that the severe measures stipulated by the legislation will help communism, rather than weaken it. Says the President, "No consideration of momentary practical expediency can justify putting such a law as this into force." After making this statement the President warned that the Nation might fall into "domestic hysteria." He added that the legislation passed by Congress would "weaken our existing Homeland Security measures, and seriously hamper the activities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and other law enforcement agencies." Senior Truman also did something unaccustomed, when he addressed a personal note to each of the members of the House of Representatives asking them to study the legislation carefully before they decide whether or not to override his veto. Explains ItaMnee Explaining his veto of the anti-communism bill, President Truman offers his reasons. (1) To help it potential enemies to require that a complete list of factories, laboratories, and other defense facilities be published. (2) To require it that the Justice Department and its Federal Bureau of Investigation waste an enormous amount of time and energy trying to comply with stipulations that could not be practiced. (3) To deprive the United States of the (Continued on page 14 Col. 5)
Eclipse on Monday Lunar Phenomenon to be Observed at Midnight; Lasts 46 Minutes
By Luis Hornindos Aquiao Editor of EL MUNDO Dr. Facundo Bueao, dean of the Department of Natural Sciences of the University of Puerto Rico, recommends the observation of the lunar eclipse of the 25th of the current moon, since there will be no opportunity for another eclipse of the moon until the year 1953. The lunar eclipse will take place almost at midnight and will be total, like the one that took place on April 12 of next year, although this one will be of shorter duration, more or less 46 minutes. The totality of the eclipse will begin at 11:54 a.m. past meridian on April 25 and will last until 12:40 p.m. the following day, making it visible to the public at midnight. As reported by Dr. Bueao, before the totality of the eclipse, the eclipse will be titled Inttréa taptctáculo because the moon will gradually stop from twilight to umbra, and at vtrá tn luctilvu posiclonte dt partial teliptt, as it enters the aatóllte in the shadow cast by the Earth, shining as much "in reverse direction after totality. Dr. Busco drew, at the request of the editor, the diatintaa faiei of the teliptt, according to it iluatra, rtprtatatatnting the moon in four successive points.
the moon in four successive points of contact with the shadow. Dr. Bueao's explanation of the stages of the eclipse is as follows: "If we face south, with the west to the right, the drawing will be slightly in front of our head to represent the position of the moon during the eclipse. The moon will be penetrating the shadow from west to east, i.e. from right to left, but by virtue of the rotation of the rotation the whole drawing will be running to the right with the passage of time. The moon at midnight is about 18 degrees south of the zenith. Because the sun is on the autumnal equinox (September 2$ is the beginning of autumn) the full moon corresponds to the so-called "la coaocha moon," and is at approximately the same time on various nights." Dr. Buoso explained that the moon has no lus of its own and shines by lus roflojada of the sun, making a monthly turn around the Earth and some vtcee being aligned almost exactly with the col. 81 the moon is between ol col and the Earth, there will be eclipae of tol, poro the oo the Earth the body (Continued on Page 14, Col 3).
By JACK JAMES WITH U.S. MARINE INFANTRY* ON SEOUL ROAD, Korea, Sept. 22 (PU) - Seoul common defenders dug in tonight, preparing to present the marines advancing toward the city with a battle that may be as rough as any they have fought in their long combatant lives. The fleeing civilians reported that the Reds were preparing fortifications throughout the city. Front line clerks said that "it looks like we will have to march from house to house and street to street." There were also reports that the entrances to the city had been mined. The Marines were approaching the city of Seoul.
Major Red Resistance Is in Seoul Stops U.S. Forces in Suburbs In the South Americans March on Chinju. Allies at Kumchon By FRm'TREMAINE TOKYO, Saturday, Sept. 23 (PU). - U.S. Marine forces attacking at the gates of Seoul were held back Friday by vigorous resistance by the Communists, but instead the Army recaptured or Suwon and its important airstrip and opened a gap of nearly 50 kilometers in the all-important supply route to the North Koreans. At the southern bridgehead, American and South Korean troops were advancing in all sectors except at a point 20 miles northeast of Waegwan, where the ROK forces had stopped, and on the Naktong River west of Taegu, where the British were fighting. The Marines hoped to seize South Korea before nightfall. However, it was held back by a heavy curtain of Communist artillery and mortar fire. This forced the United Nations forces to halt on the eastern side of the hill, on the south, three kilometers from the center of the cliff. Situation to the south On the perimeter around Fusin, the situation is as follows: In (Continued on page 12 Col. 1) Atomic Explosion Witness Will Arrive An eyewitness to the atomic explosion at Hiroshima will arrive in Puerto Rico on the 30th of , current, as reported yesterday by the Consulate General of Spain. The Reverend Father Pedro Arrupe, rector and teacher of the Caaa of Formation that the Jesuit Fathers have in Hiroshima, Japan, will arrive in Puerto Rico soon, perhaps on the 30th, according to the Spanish Consulate, with the purpose of giving a series of conferences in the Ca--"a of Spain and other centers about his experiences as an eyewitness of the atomic explosion that destroyed Hiroshima in August 1945. It was reported that "when the atomic explosion occurred, Father Arrupe with his forty companions saw the fateful glow, heard the terrible explosion, and fell to the ground like everyone else in his house". "He quickly recovered, looked around him and, seeing the city engulfed in flames, ran to it to help the wounded. His work was very hard all that day and night, and for several days and nights that followed." Father Arrupe, before joining the Society of Jesus, reportedly studied medicine with the best grades at the University of Madrid, which is why he was able to assist, as a corps doctor, the victims of the terrible explosion.
Reds Entrenched in Seoul To Defend It House By House
three different points. On the western outskirts of Seoul, an American spearhead was advancing inch by inch through the rice paddies and open fields toward the city limits. To the southwest, troops marching the third part of the way through the industrial suburb of Youngdungpo faced heavy enemy fire as they approached the hills on the southeastern borders of the suburb. Next Entry It appeared likely that one or more American warheads would soon enter Seoul itself, but that was only the beginning if the Reds decided to defend the city to the death. Apparently the U.S. garrison (Continued on page 4)
Defense Calls For Increased Reserves
Universal Military Service or Marshall Believes Nation Could Have Avoided Past Conflict ROCHESTER, N.Y., Sept. 22 (New York Times Special)- In his first address as Secretary of Defense, Army General George C. Marshall last night called for universal military training to strengthen the national defense. He said that if Congress had passed such a bill, proposed after World War I by Representative James A. Wadsworth, Republican of New York, then a United States Senator, Hitler would not have dared to provoke a second world war, and the present threat of another world conflict would have been averted. General Marshall, who was sworn in as Secretary of Defense earlier in the day, spoke at a banquet given in this city by the veterans of the war in honor of Mr. Wadsworth, who is retiring at the end of the year after eighteen years as Representative from the Fourth Congressional District, and two years as Senator. General Marshall came to Rochester by air, from Wtshington. Wahlngton's Plan Secretary Marshall said that in 1790 President Wahlngton submitted to the First Congress a plan for a complete organization of the national defense based on the principle that in a self-governing republic, every able-bodied young man should be trained to defend his country. Deigra, of course, the Congress did not accept the plan, and the General claimed that if it had done so, he would have been prepared from the beginning for any military emergency in our subsequent history. "Now, it is an Intereunt fact that in January 1920, after World War I, Jamea Wadiworth, chairman of the Senate Committee on Military Affairs, submitted a draft proposing a modern adaptation of the original Wahlngton detention plan," said General Marshall. "The result of this plan, had it been approved, would have preserved the World War I Army as a permanent national institution, ready to be mobilized at any time in the future. "If Congress had passed the Wadsworth bill, I believe that even Hitler would not have objected to provoking (Continued on page 14 Col. 6).