THE N®NDO
NEW YÜM, JuUo 1L (PU). - Bn the afternoon today regtotreren lea dgutontee temperature": New York, 78| Chicago, 78; Wáahlngten, 75; Míaasi. 88. Predictions! Moderate and mild weather. Tomporeture máa alte, "orea ée 18. '
WEATHER PBONO8TICO8 FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY:AYEB: Maximum temperature, 86 gradual min. 74 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea nlvol, at 4:" do afternoon, 36.M inches do mercury.
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE' ABC.
NUMBER 14087 FIVE CENTS
YEAR XXXI
Enterad m aecond darn matter" "an Juan. P. 1,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 22, 1950
Army Calls In National Guard Units Surge Of ensive American Offensives In Central And Eastern Korea
V CHuburír >.%, SOUTH - 1V¿ far "ma t-1? XájOf j - r . * M-fl Im flecho negree "chalen "I advance of Im fuerana comunlaUa toward Taejon, where American tea fuenaa (open arrow) using tree-and-a-half-inch proeotUsa, delayed the Red thrust, destroying eight enemy tauqueo. To the southwest, the town of Iri, which fell into the hands of the cumtndsUs. In the central sector (B), Red troops made movements which indicated that they were preparing to launch a flank attack on Allied communications. American troops landed at Pohang (O) and moved west and northwest to protect supply lines. A deopachn from the front reported that Yongdok fell to the Reds. The underlined areas are the sites that were attacked by American aircraft. (Associated Press photo). South Koreans Recapture Important Yechon Square 25th Infantry Selected JnidadMs Ready for Attack. - Reds Advance Toward Kumsan By Frank TBEMA1NE TOMO, "ibado, July 22 (PU)- Dispatches from the front lines indicate that U.S. and South Korean troops, fighting shoulder to shoulder, are attacking in central and east Korea. Lt. Gen. Walton H. Walker, commander in chief of the U.S. forts in Korea,* Lt.
General Walton H. Walker, commander in chief of U.S. forts in Korea, * launched selected troops of the 5th Infantry Division against the North Korean Communists. Dispatches from Walker headquarters said that the South Koreans, with American help, succeeded in recapturing Yechon, forty-five miles north of the Allied supply line from Pusin to the western front. On the eastern coast South Korean troops, supported by artillery and the U.S. Navy, were attacking the North Koreans who had pushed as far as Yongdok, twenty-five miles north of the perimeter defended by the First Cavalry Division, which followed the 5th. Communist Attack On the western front, two North Korean columns pushed west and south against the line defended by the Vlgéslmocuarta Infantry Division, in an effort to exploit their capture of Taejon. The Communist troops forced the 21st Infantry, which was defending the vanguard, to withdraw some four miles to the east of Taejon. Members of the Army Corps of Engineers, who blew up a railroad bridge almost under the noses of the North Korean attackers, succeeded in delaying the advance; and the latest dispatches reported that there was a lull, and that no man's land separated the American and Communist lines. The American soldiers trapped at Taejon in a courageous rearguard action were still returning in trucks to the Georgian barracks of the Vlgéslmocuarta Infantry Division, after escaping under a deluge of fire. The fate of Major General William F. Dean, commander* of the Division, who fought alongside the rank and file at Taejon, was still unknown. Dispatches from United Press war correspondents said that all the wounded had been evacuated from the city and that many of the men in the rear were expected to return within a few days. No Dean Models General Douglas MacArthur did not authorize his customary midnight communiqué. The spokesman for GHQ, who said there would be no midnight communiqué, also reported that there was no word from Dean. The news that troops of the Twenty-fifth Division had gone into action was given by Ralph Teatsorth, United Press correspondent, stationed in the United States.
Island Invited To U.S. Teachers' Convention To Be Held December. Delegation Attends Missouri Conference The National Education Association has extended a special invitation to Puerto Rican teachers to send delegates to the next Southeastern regional conference, to be held in Louisville, Kentucky, in December of this year. According to information sent by said entity, among the 450 teachers from all over the nation and other parts of the world attending the Seventh Annual Teachers' Conference in Saint Charles, Missouri, there are several Puerto Ricans. These reports mention Mariana Suéroz, supervisor of schools in Comerlo or Irma Vlnconty do López, from Central High School, who is a member of the board of directors of the Teachers Association and president of the department of high school teachers, a body of that entity. They also mention Mr. Diogo I. Hornéndez, also a member of the board of directors of the Teachers' Association and president of the department of vocational teachers of the same. Mr. Hornandes attends the conference (Continued on pg. 18, Col 4).
1 . /-J b C .- -M S" K i ''I ; "y Gr *
Members of the Senate Armed Services Committee discuss President Trul man's request for an increase in the nation's military forces, as expressed in his historic message to Congress on Wednesday. Do is-
25 Buses Shorten Route In Fdz. Juncos Starting August 1, They Will End Their Trips At Martin Peña Crossing Starting August 1, 25 independent buses for more than ten passengers, which travel between San Juan and Villa Palmeras vis Fernandez Juncos, will only be able to go as far as Martin Peña. This was resolved by the Public Service Commission, according to the information provided to EL MUNDO by its President, Jorge V. Toledo. Toledo, when questioned yesterday afternoon. Mr. Toledo said that the 1st buses affected by the change decreed by the Commission, which provide services subject to the corresponding authorization of the PSC, had previously made a trip in the morning hours from stop 15 to Fort Buchanan. In the afternoon hours they covered the route between Buchanan and San Juan, via Fernandez Juncos. To serve the San Juan-Vi-11a Palmeras route, via Fernandez Juncos, the Commission had authorized the operators of the aforementioned vehicles to provide a service that extended from 7:30 A. M. to 4:00 P. M. and from 5:00 P. M. in the afternoon. The route on the latter route has been limited so that from August 1 onwards, the aforementioned buses will only be able to provide service from 7:30 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. and from 5:00 P.M. to 4:00 P.M. (Continued on page 16, Col. 6).
Lector C. Hunt, D-Wyoming; Senator Lyndon Johnson, D-Texas; and Senator Mlltard Tydlngs, D-Maryland. (Associated Press photo),
Concepcion Says Muñoz Ignored PIP In Election Discussion Says Only Minority Consulted. UgidatiTa..Comenta Gestión Font Snárei en Junta Electoral The President of the Puerto Rican Independence Party, Dr. Gilberto Coneepdón do Grada, declared yesterday that Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, President of the PDP, has deliberately ignored the PIP in relation to the electoral machinery for the holding of the elections for the referendum on the Constitution.
referendum on the Constitution. * The PIP has deliberately ignored the PIP in connection with the electoral machinery for the holding of the referendum on the Constitution referendum elections. The following is what Dr. Concepción do Gracia stated*: "The President of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Merln, who is also head of the government of Puerto Rico, has totally ignored the Puerto Rican Independence Party in the crnsidoraclón related to the organization of the electoral machinery for the holding of the referendum elections on the measure on the so-called constitution. The Third Party, despite being the Puerto Rican Independence Party, has been the third main party of Puerto Rico, a party that deposited 66,141 votes at the polls in the last elections. This has been so despite the fact that the Puerto Rican Independence Party is the only active opposition to the Popular Party in the country today. This has been so despite the fact that the Puerto Rican Independence Party is the only party that opposes the so-called constitution project. Mr. Muñoz Marin has deliberately ignored the Puerto Rican Independence Party, even though he knows that our party has been the one that has made the most constructive suggestions regarding the manner in which the elections should be held. Upon his return from Washington, Senator Victor Gutierrez Franqul, after having held a two-hour conference with Mr. Muñoz Marin, officially announced that the referendum elections would take place next November. The news was published with great profusion in the front pages of the newspapers and circulated on the radio. (Continued on page 16 Col. 5)
♦-■ 1 ' Acheson Says No Early Peace Possible Says Korean War Will Have Solution That Will Be Bloody By JAMES E. ROPER WASHINGTON, July 22. (PU)Secretary of State Dean Acheson said there is no prospect of an early settlement of the Korean war. । The chances of a negotiated peace in the near future are virtually nil, he said, unless the North Korean Communists suddenly decide to withdraw to their border at the 38th Parallel. But he made it clear that he contldera mnv Improbable. His hint that the Korean war will have a bloody conclusion was prompted by reporters' questions about Indian Premier Pandit Nehru's attempt to act as a mediator between Acheson and Stalin in negotiating peace. Acheson said he had ended his discussions with Nehru on the matter. In the exchange of notes, the Secretary of State sharply rejected Stalin's insinuation to the effect that Russia might be prepared to suspend the North Korean block if the United States were to help install Communist China in the United Nations. Acheson's position remained firm in the U.S. position that the only solution to the problem is for the North Korean Communists to be installed in the United Nations.
State Constitution to be Signed in Hawaii Today
By JACK BUBBY HONOLULU, July 21. (PU) - The constitution, on which all hopes for Hawaii rest, will be formally signed tomorrow in the throne room where just over fifty years ago the Hawaiian monarchs ruled the islands. Then the sixty-three delegates who spent seventy-eight days drafting the historic document will send it to Washington and wait patiently for Sonado to decide whether they have wasted their time. The constitution - described by local political observers as a compromise document - was Merit to speed the transition from a territory to a state.
to statehood, if and when Hawaii is granted statehood, if it is granted statehood. Its ten thousand words form the armature of what would be America's first overseas state. In most cases, it follows the traditional non-state government rule, but in others, it is unique. For example, it guarantees Hawaii citizens the right to marry whom they choose, regardless of race or religious creed. It recognizes the right of labor to organize, though not hey specific guarantee of the right. Establishes a careful balance between the executive and legislative branches of government, providing for the right to organize. Government, providing (Continued on page 18, Col 8)
American Countries Doubtful of Giving Aid to U.N.
Argentina, Brazil, Mexico Are Only Ones Considering Giving Some Military Support For HENBY BAYMONT LAKE SUCCESS, New York, July 2L - (PU) - Most Latin American delegates to the United Nations today doubted whether their countries could make any substantial military contribution to MacArthur's command in Korea, and predicted that, in response to Trygve Lie's recent request for effective aid, they would send supplies to the United Nations forces. Argentina, Brazil and Mexico were the only three of the twenty Latin American republics contemplating giving any military aid to the United Nations. Most stressed that their countries had only small and poorly equipped armies and that they wanted to take the time to form an expeditionary force for the UN's "unified command" in Korea. Several delegates still believed that, in effect, the immediate support Latin America extended to the Security Council resolutions on Korea would remain an expression of solidarity in combating aggressive communism, rather than putting into practice any immediate material involvement. Another obstacle to effective aid to the United Nations is the provision in the U.N. Charter that all military aid extended to the United Nations must first be approved by the constitutional procedure of U.N. member nations. In some Latin American republics this constitutional aspect may take several months before it is resolved. So far, only Argentina and Brazil have counted on Lio's July 14 request, in which the Secretary General said there was an "urgent need" for "additional effective assistance," especially ground forces, in the Korean crisis. Both sides in their responses stated that they would extend assistance "within the limits of our possibilities. Observers believe that this virtually precluded the hope that these two Latin powers would send troops to the Koreas. It was believed, however, that naval units and aircraft could be sent to Korea as a "sign of solidarity." In their replies Argentina and Brazil also notified the Secretary General that they had consulted with the unified command in Washington regarding the specific assistance, probably in goods, which they could actually provide. There are indications that Mexico, Cuba, Venezuela, Colombia and Uruguay have also initiated talks with the unified command in Washington, although they have not yet answered the request of the United Nations. Meanwhile, several offers to send supplies to Korea have come to the United Nations from Chile, Ecuador, Colombia and Cuba. They consist of foodstuffs and raw materials such as cash, rubber and nitrate. Antonio Quevedo, the new Ecuadorian delegate to the Security Council, said that his country could supply troops with coffee, quinine, rubber and balsa wood, but noted that Ecuador has the smallest army in Latin America and would not be in a position to send it to Korea. The position of the republics (Contlnús in péglna 18 Col. 1)
E. U.S. Appears to Be Preparing the Way for Crossing the 38th Parallel
By Jaaeo E. Sopor WASHINGTON, July 2L-(PU>-The United States admitted today that it is now responsible for marking the 38th parallel as the boundary line in Korea. At the same time it tried to diminish the importance of this Korean border. The explanation is in preparation for the day when U.S. troops arrive at the parallel - and then have to move on. U.S. history on Korea was recounted in a State Department white paper. The white paper states that over the years, Ruala has been causing difficulties to Korean affairs, and has finally refused to do so.
The white paper states that for years, Ruala has been causing difficulties to Korean affairs, and has finally refused to use her influence to stop the Communist invaders from Korea. History commented when the 38th parallel was proposed as a temporary border between American and Russian jurisdiction in Korea. It was on August 10, 1845, that Japan suddenly offered its rum- > ddon, to end World War II. The Pentagon hastily began to draw up plans to accept the surrender. The U.S. Government," says the White Paper, "pro-" put the Soviet troops in a "pro- * (Continued on page 18, Col 8)
Attorney General Explains Bolita Ponce Case ■ " -x. . f
Attorney General Vicente Gélgel Polanco said yesterday that the Justice Department is interested in prosecuting anyone who violates the Bolita Law, but he does not believe that innocent people should be prosecuted on the basis of malicious or illegal actions of members of the Police or the Police Department. Géigel Polanco stated the above while explaining why he authorized the filing of a case for infringement of the Bolita Law against five citizens by the prosecutor of Ponee, Arturo Ontrón Garcia. Alluding to this case, he said that "unfortunately it is not the only one of its kind; there have been others that we have made known to the Governor for the corresponding investigation", Explaining the causes that motivated his authorization to file the case, Gélgel Polanco said that when it was reported in the press the filing of the complaint against Joaquín Gusmán Toro, Teodoro Alvarado, Carlos M. Rodriguez Zaragoza, Jalmo Rafael Pegon and Jose A. Burgos - the latter being the son of Agustin Burgos - he asked prosecutor William Morojos for a report on the circumstances of the case, since he had heard that there were certain antecedents indicating that they were involved in the matter for other reasons that were not purely in the best interest of justice. He went on to say that upon receiving a memorandum from Prosecutor Moreloa after having conducted an investigation, he felt that the case was of such gravity that he submitted the memorandum to the Governor, as it appeared that there had been an unlawful or illegal action by the Vice Squad. Contradictory statements The Mayor Morsloo recommended to the Department of Justice in his memorandum that it order the case closed in view of the contradictory statements of the officers and policies involved in the arrest of the defendants, which were not credible. After studying the prosecutor's memorandum and reading the other circumstances of the case, the Prosecutor decided to file the case. The letter written by the Prosecutor to the prosecutor authorizing him to file the case, states in part as follows: "After taking into consideration the special circumstances of this case, as they result from your memorandum, and your recommendation that the same be filed definitively, I hereby authorize you to act in such manner, if (Continued on p. 18, Col. 4)
This Is the New American Bazooka ' - I a 'áte?'wSF i w An infantry sergeant poaa eon the new basooka Bidon do shoot you. This weapon, which fires a projectile of I B5 godas, has been credited with the deotruedon of the tanguea n "soo i in W first oparidon on the Eorean war front. Its projectile has a range of 4M yards against targets already hit and has succeeded in penetrating the armored armor of the huge oil tanks. This photo was taken at Fort Bening, Georgia.
Affects Organized Reserve Group:
Order Does Not Cover Puerto Rico Yet - e T - " - Nor Has It Affected Island Regulars. Veterans May Be Called Up By DEAN wTdTTTMER WASHINGTON, July 21. (PU)- The Army began calling up National Guard and organized reserve units today and a spokesman said some might go overseas. The Military Department of the M Antilles in San Juan told EL MUNDO yesterday that it had not yet received any instructions about recruiting National Guard or Reserve troops. L A "i was disclosed by Major John O'Graddy, Army Public Re- ' doñee Officer, when questioned by a fellow nou- ner about the order p given by the Army for the mo- 1 vlllMdón of the National Guard. Major O'Graddy told EL MUNDO that the Antilles Military Department of Puerto Rico is attached to the Caribbean Zone, whose headquarters are located in Panama. It is from this place, he said, that the order to mobilize the National Guard at Fort Bloo, if the national emergency requires it, will be issued. On the other hand, the plan to move to the Lojoae/East, of several regular units, does not affect the high category units that serve on Puerto Rico and the M M M Command of the Caribbean, according to a military source yesterday. According to a report published yesterday by this newspaper, the Army put several regular units of each of its six military regions on the move to the Far East. The action reportedly did not affect in any way regular units stationed in Puerto Rico and other areas of the Caribbean Command, since all military regions or headquarters seats outside the geographic boundaries of the United States are considered overseas regions, even though, as in the case of Puerto Rico, Hawaii and other islands, they are politically U.S. territories. * The continental United States, as explained above, is divided into six military regions, in each of which there is a command with headquarters. As is clear from the above explanation, only from these : regiments will regular units depart for the time being for the Korean front. The order was issued while the Congress was beginning to prepare the way for the armed services to add from six hundred thousand to seven hundred thousand men to their strength. Meanwhile, the Air Force revealed that it might need authority to begin recruiting World War II veterans. Simultaneously, Senator Millord E. Tydlngs, Democrat of Maryland and chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said that his group would review the Selective Service Act to determine whether to eliminate some of its provisions to address the need to increase the military's strength. The rapid seriousness of the mobilization move has been in response to President Truman's recommendations that more men and money be authorized to meet the Korean war and to prepare against any Communist aggression elsewhere in the world. i Limited Order, For now, the Army said, the order calling up the National Guard and reserves will be limited to units outside the divisions. The members of those units mobilized will have thirty days to arrange their personal affairs - As in all mobilization orders, the Army did not identify the units, nor did it say how many men it has called up. It limited itself to announcing that those chosen will be recruited "as the need arises and as facilities are provided for their reception and training". There are 332,000 officers and men in the National Guard and 600,000 in the reserves. The Naelonal Guard has 25 attempt divisions and two armored divisions, twenty combat regiments and 1,288 units of various types, including (Continued on page 18, CoL 1)