THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Patchy to partly cloudy with some isolated showers and thundershowers during the late afternoon and early evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 87 degrees; low, 71 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:80 p.m., 29411 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, ooptiombro 99. (FU).- Late today m reported tea *1 guiante* temperatures: New York, 67; Chicago, 79; Wáahlngton, 70; Miami, 88. Forecast" for tomorrow m New York and neighboring Hudadee: eontiderablementa cloudy, eambtea in temperature.
MARAÑA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 30, 1950
NUMBER 14156
FIVE CENTS
South Koreans Cannonade From 38th Parallel . % * " _ / * \
Hershey Calls For Call Review
It's on Atomic Blast Island T estigo
All indications are that the '51 harvest will not be limited
Father Pedro Arrupe Witnessed the Catastrophe Destroyed Hiroshima By CARLOS NIEVES RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The Reverend Father Pedro Arrupe, eyewitness to the atomic explosion which on August 15, 1945 destroyed the Japanese city of Hiroshima and precipitated the unconditional surrender of the Japanese Empire, related his terrible experiences yesterday in an interesting lecture he delivered to the students of Sacred Heart College. The Jesuit priest, who before embracing an ecclesiastical career studied medicine in Spain, was novice master at the Jesuit Novitiate in Hiroshima. He is currently traveling in America as a representative of the Catholic University of Tokyo, and since Thursday afternoon he has been in Puerto Rico, where he arrived from Venezuela. Father Arrupe said that on the morning of August 15, 1945, while he was in his room at the Novitiate, located four and a half kilometers from Hiroshima, he suddenly saw a dazzling flash, comparable to the explosion of a magnesium bulb. Immediately, he fell to the ground and had the feeling that (Continued on page 16 Coi. 1) Official Road Map Ready First Edition Consists of 60,000 Copies, Jimenez Will Go to Act! Washington The first Official Road Map of Puerto Rico, printed by the Department of the Interior, has been finished and is about to be put into circulation on the Island. Advance copies of the map arrived in San Juan by air and were sent to newspaper editors and the Governor. - This first edition of 60,000 copies has been printed at a cost of 810,800, which represents an average cost of eighteen cents per unit, according to Interior Commissioner Jorge Jimenez, yesterday morning. The Commissioner stated that the plates for this official road map will serve to print many thousands of additional plates at a cost estimated at no more than ten cents per unit, depending on the new additions that may be necessary, as well as the literature to be included in future editions. Distribution This first edition will be distributed to various government agencies, legislators and agencies (Continued on p. 16, Col. 4).
■ ■ ■ lilililí
Wants Deferments Limited Advocates Recruiting 2nd War Veterans And Revising Requirements By W. R. Higginbotham WASHINGTON, Sept. '29 (PU) - Selective Service Director Lewis B. Hershey today recommended a sweeping revision of the draft laws to permit conscription of World War II veterans and to limit dependency dlfernlents. He also proposed that the term of service for conscripts be increased from 21 to 30 months and that physical and mental requirements be reduced so that the armed services could recruit men only for limited service. Herahey told the Armed Services Committee that he is researching recruiting policy and that if they follow his suggestions, it will not be necessary to change the current age limits to achieve the armed services' goal of three million men by next July. Georgia Democrat Cari Vinson, the committee's chairman, said the Army should lower the physical requirements for accepting men classified as 4-F, who can replace able-bodied soldiers in clerical positions. Complaint Hershey complained that the di* forimlents are too broad. He proposed to defer only to men who are supporting immediate family members and men who are now being deferred to "collateral dependents" such as in-laws. President Truman may change the regulations on deferrals, and Hershey's statements indicate that changes are possible. As for veterans, they are deferred by law and only the Army can order their conscription. Hershey said he does not favor, at least for now, eliminating the system of voluntary conscripts to rely exclusively on the draft, as in World War II. (In insisting on extending the term of service to 30 months, Hershey advocated that shoulders be drafted soon after the age of 18. Total Available He stated that he has only 1,536,000 classified as 1-A in the 19 to 25 age group, although 90,000 young people are enrolled monthly. He stated that his program would raise the total number of available men to three million. The Chief Selectman called for a "functional approach" to the problem of physical and mental requirements to allow for the conscription of a considerable number of men for limited service. He stated that there are about 606,000 between the ages of 19 and 25 classified as 4-F. "In August we lost 44,000 shoulders, two divisions, to the mental exams alone," he said. He added that for every hundred hom* brea examined, 29 are rejected for physical reasons, volnto for mental deficiencies and new for other causes. - _ M ■ Communists Cross Western Sector By Walter G. Rundle FRANCFORT, Sept. 29 <PU>- "Activists," Communists enthroned by the Soviets, are crossing the border between the eastern and western sectors in large numbers to accompany the German Western Reds in the weekend show of force which may result in disorder in the American, British and French zones. German border police said that the "Free German Youth," a Communist organization, and other Red front groups were penetrating Hegalmonto into West Germany at night in groups of seventy to ten. They said that others were entering during the day equipped with uniforms, banners, musical instruments and valid permits between the zones. They said they have been sent to (Continued on Page 1G, Col, 6/
Announcement Expected In December Brannan Aide Says Factors Working In Puerto Rico's Favor By MICHAEL J. O'NEILL WASHINGTON, Sept. 29 (PU) - There were strong indications yesterday that the government will not impose restrictions on Puerto Rico's sugar production next year. The official announcement will not be made until December, but all evidence now points to a decision to abandon the idea of tight controls on 1951 production. Secretary of Agriculture Charles F. Brannan hinted at this possibility in a recent letter to Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernos Isern, and one of his aides was more explicit yesterday. "All factors are working in Puerto Rico's favor," the aide said. "The need for restrictions is much more stringent now than it was last spring. It's quite possible we won't have to use controls now." The government's absorption of the island's 150,000-tonne surplus this year was cited as the primary reason why restrictions are less necessary. The official said that even if inventory and consumer demand declines, Puerto Rico's production should not be affected. Although unconsumed reserves accumulated during this summer's war purchases may lower prices next year, ol exporto said that reductions in the coropn" eemo rostrado de on, would be absorbed mostly by Cuba. "The Continent will still absorb the full quota of 910,000 tons from Puerto Rico," he said, "so the only question to be resolved is how much of the surplus will be allowed." Last spring the Department set the machinery to restrict the 1951 harvest, but never decided what I should allow for the island's normal surplus. Puerto Rican producers estimate a gross surplus of 230,000 tons for 1951, over the quota for the Mainland and local consumption. The overall surplus this year was 271,000. The Government now seems to be of the opinion that in the light of world conditions it may be very desirable to hold such a surplus in 1951 - as a hedge against emergencies. It could resort to the "proportionate share" system on a "smaller scale," he said. At present, he said, there seemed to be good reason to desist from rigorous controls on the sugar crop.
The Reverend Father Pedro Arrupe descends from the plane that brought him to Puerto Rico (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Auctions To Be Announced In October For Auctions For Homes In 4 Towns To Be In Bayamón, Arecibo, Caguas And Carolina.Serra Gets Washington Sum For Studies By RURICO E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The Insular Homes Authority will announce during the month of October the first auctions for the first housing projects corresponding to the towns of Bayamón, Arecibo, Carolina, and Caguas, as well as in the towns of Bayamón, Arecibo, Carolina, and Carolina.
A New Case Of Hydrophobia Has Been Confirmed In Rural Area Of Morovis. The Chief of the Epidemiology Bureau of the Department of Health, Dr. Abel de Juan, reported yesterday the confirmation of a new case of canine rabies, which occurred in the rural area of Morovis. Dr. de Juan said that the case was confirmed by the Health Department's Biological Laboratory, directed by Dr. Francisco J. Mejfas. With the confirmation of this case, there are now seven cases of canine rabies registered in Puerto Rico. The other confirmed cases have been those that occurred during the year in the following towns (continued on page 16 Col. 5)
The other confirmed cases were those that occurred during the year in the following towns, the construction of which is included in the vast public housing program authorized by the 1949 Housing Act. This was revealed to EL MUNDO by Mr. Emilio Serra, executive director of the aforementioned housing agency, who has just returned from Washington, where he obtained an advance of 832,613,000 for the preliminary studies of the program for the renovation of backward areas in the metropolitan area. In addition to the success of his efforts, Mr. Serra returned convinced that the federal public housing program on the Island will follow its normal course, judging by the attitude shown to him by the senior officials of the Federal Public Housing Administration. Commenting on this attitude, he said, "they are not so pessimistic about the international situation. They continue to work normally in the development of plans for the development of backward areas as well as in the approval of the housing projects submitted to them by the authorities.
Aerial View of the New Loíza Dam
Y™f í? te within two years, informed the Aqueduct and Sewer Authority, m A®® ®® "motralrá at a cost of 82,131,600 million gallons of water daily, in season of estíoB1 "baoteclmlento of potable water of te area Yesterday was cast te first portion of the 55,000 meters e h " rm *ir 6n that will be part of te enormous work. The dam will be a concrete structure, with an approximate length of 210 meters, a maximum height at the top and a maximum height at the bottom of the dam.
The dam will be a concrete structure, with a length of approximately 210 meters, a maximum height at the top of the spillway of 18 meters, and a total height of the river bottom at the water level of 29 meters. This dam will have eight fan gates, each 89 feet wide and 80 feet high, which will be electrically operated. The reservoir that will form the dam will cover an area of 1,200 acres and will have the capacity to supply 100 million gallons of water per day, of which the filtration plant already built will use 80 million gallons per day.
70,000 Reds Trap Closes
dA * Major General David Barr (right), commander of the Seventh Division, shakes hands with First Lieutenant Robert Baker, Washington, commander of the first tank of the 1st Cavalry Division at ChangJL The occasion was the moment of contact between the troops landed by Inchon, The occasion was at the moment of contact between the troops landing at Inchon and those defending Fusan, thus closing the trap in which the troops had joined after advancing along the Seoul-Taegu road, crossing Korea from one coast to the other. In the tani 1 l'? ulerdB - right: Cpl. Stanley Davis, Cpl. Harold Riffle, of Akron, Ohio; Sgt. Arthur Lorrell!, of Indiana, Pennsylvania; and Cpl. John Roades, McKeesport, Pennsylvania, (Associated Press photo).
Law Modifies Federal Income Tax Payment Covers All Federal Personnel Here. Treasurer Expands Provisions Acting Treasurer Francisco de Jesús Toro declared yesterday that the most important effect of the amendments to the Federal Income Tax Law, recently approved by President Truman, is that Puerto Ricans and Americans residing in Puerto Rico are given the same treatment as U.S. citizens residing in the United States. Until now," he said, "Puerto Ricans residing in Puerto Rico who were obligated to pay the tax were considered, for federal income tax purposes, as non-resident aliens. The new federal income tax legislation modifies the taxation system in a favorable manner for mainland residents of the Island who derive income from Puerto Rico sources; and for Puerto Ricans residing in the Island who derive income from U.S. sources for concepts such as dividends, participation in benefits, etc. (Continued on pg. 16, Col, 8).
Unions Pursue Claims With Shipping Lines Agree to Strike If Not Accepted. Pending Clauses For LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO The Longshoremen's and Dockers' Unions, Iniulsr Council Number 2 of the ILA and the Dock Employees Union agreed yesterday to authorize their Negotiating Committee to insist with the shipping companies on their demands for distribution of wage increases and other indole during the next harvest, and to declare a strike movirolento when it is ready if the companies refuse to accept their demands. Mr. Aníbal Marín, secretary of the Workers' Negotiating Committee which has been discussing collective bargaining agreements applicable to the aforementioned unions, reported yesterday on the agreements reached by two of their assemblies. Mr. Marín explained that the UDEM met to consider the status of the negotiation of the agreement with the shipping companies, and that the ILA's Island Council Number 2 (Intornaclo(Continued on Page 16, Col. 7)
by electric pumps, making a distance of 8*1/1 kilometer©. From the filtration plant, the filtered water will pass to a tank with a capacity of 10,000,008 gallons, from which it will be distributed by gravity to the distribution network. In addition to the dam itself, an electric power plant will also be constructed. The total cost of the Rio Grande de Loísa project is estimated by Prasa at 89*969,069, (Photo by Benjamin Montee).
Ordered Not To Cross The Border
E. U.S. Does Not Explain Instruction Given Allies Continue Sweeping Advance Through South - Small Counterattacks By FILÓm' TREMAINE . TOKYO, Saturday, September M (PU)- South Korean soldiers, under the Inspiration of victory, advanced yesterday to the 38th Parallel, ahead of United Nations troops, or began an artillery bombardment against North Korea. The South Koreans, attached to the Third Republican Division, advanced fifty miles ahead of other United Nations forces to the so-called "geographic fiction" of the peninsula. They could have followed, had they not been ordered by the U.S. Army not to invade North Korea. The order was issued without explanation by the U.S. military advisory group. It told the South Koreans to stop where they were and regroup. Whether this means that they must prepare to hold their line on the Parallel, from which the Communists launched the Invasion on June 25, or for an assault on the North, is now uncertain. The answer lies in the hands of the United Nations and President Trump. Republican forces wasted no time in attacking the communist group occupying a hillside two miles off the eastern coast of Korea. The United Press corpsmen, Glonn A. Stackh "u> so and Charles Corddry, oboarvaroa dssdoa dssdo ol aíra míontrgs tes sursa* rsanos attacking the Communists. "There's a battle down there"^ - said ol commander J, W. XngraaL co-pilot dol transporto C-47, on ol quo vlsjsban the corrosponosloa Lt. corono! Konnoth W" Northerner, do Fresno, Csllfornte, pilot dol plane, added: "Certainly they are attacking Juro". While the battle of the Parallel was in progress, the Estonian forces advanced to a point about 17 miles from the border on the east coast, north of Seoul. They were encountering resistance in their efforts to establish contact with the South Koreans on the same coast. Other South Korean units were advancing toward the Parallel. The Capitol Division was only 44 miles from the border, and only 20 miles from the American line. Second Corps, on the left flank, reported that the Eighth Division had entered Tanyang and was advancing rapidly toward Chochon, 60 miles south of the Parallel. The Sixth Division occupied Chungju and was moving toward Wonju, 45 miles from the line. The South Koreans were advancing without tanks. They carried only a few trucks. Many of the troops had walked the entire route, and were still advancing at a forced march. The U.S. forces continued their two-stage offensive, sweeping through South Korea. The Eighth Army announced in a communiqué that United Nations forces had advanced to Iri, five miles from the port city of Kunsan, on the west coast, and ninety-two miles west of Tsegu, and to Nonsan, about twenty-five miles east and ninety miles west of the port city of Kunsan, on the west coast. 18, Col 7) Governor Begins Tour Monday By Juan Martinaa Chapel 1 Batector te EL MUNDO , The Governor's plans, it has been learned, are to stay out of La Fortaleza and San Juan all next week. The Governor, however, will not be resting as he did the week just ended. All day Monday, the Governor will begin his campaign for the Constitution. The first meeting will be held on Monday at Yauco's AItlc© Park, with the participation of the leaders of the Popular Party in the districts of Ponce and Mayagüez, Pono and Mayagüez. On Tuesday, the Governor will meet with the leaders of the Arecibo and Aguadilla districts at the Arodbo Radio Club. Caguas Meeting . On Wednesday the first meeting will be in Caguas for the leaders of all districts of San Juan and Guayama. On Thursday the leaders of the Humacao district will meet (Continued on page 18 Col 3).