THE MÜN DO.
■H * WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy, with showers* "obro la* montaña* in the afternoon. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High temp. 82 degrees; minimum, 70 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.92 inches of mercury. - i
NEW YOBK, Dec. 2L PU).- This afternoon "e Reported the" following* temper*turM: New York, 88; Chicago, 28; Wáehington. 88; Miami, 72. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities*: mostly clear with the highest temperature near 40. o
NEWSPAPER OF^ 5 *"^ THE MORNING
THE FIRST DAILY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered aa second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 23, 1950
NUMBER 14240
FINAL EDITION
65th Detains North Korean Regiment China Demands U.N. Seat As Price Of Truce - -- * 12 Red Divisions Ready For Offensive
' i B ' wllMb Jk * * - ■ k -4 Having*! Wu Hslu-Chuan (right), leader of the Chinese Communist delegation, smiles as he shakes hands with Soviet delegate to the United Nations, Jacob Malik, before boarding a British airlift at New York International Airport, Nov. 19, for Ixindres on a return trip to Pelptn, Chlha. Wu said as he left that the. Chinese people will fight alongside the American people to maintain the pas. (Associated Press Photo).
As a Tribute W é Er . ti ■ % IR ISBt. ■ w" 1 - a 1 , yA Jj j - 1 'A" xk. ' ■ p " ► I kEs :Jri -I ,X /* -| ■ I I ¿ r J Mm" n / k i Jy i Puerto Rican heroism this weaving an amount of glorio in the icy regions of Korea to offer to the Island this Christmas 1950. In homage to these men, who call themselves heroes, EL MUNDO graces its front page today with the colors of the 65th Infantry Regiment, Los Borinqueños.
No Recognition That Parallel 38 Is No Longer the Border in Korea
In Broadcast from Beijing, Chou Demands Withdrawal of All Foreign Troops
By ROBERT VERMILLION "TOKYO, Dec. 23 (KCNA) - Communist China rejected the United Nations' call for a suspension of hostilities in Korea; demanded a seat in the United Nations as the price for peace; and hinted that Red Chinese forces no longer recognize the 38th Parallel as the border between North and South Korea.
border between North and South Korea. The attitude of Communist China. made public in statements by Premier and Foreign Minister Chou in Lal, through the Lal. Chou in Lal, through Radio Peking, coincided with General Douglas MacArthur's warning that the red attacks in Korea are increasing in intensity and may be a precursor to a new mass offensive into South Korea. Chou's statements were presented to the world as the official response of the People's Republic of China to three requests for a "cease-fire" meeting by the three-member United Nations commission. The broadcast gave no indication that any further response was forthcoming, nor that it had been transmitted to the UN. Chou said that the request of the United Nations for a "cease-fire" M "arrive', because Romudist China is not a member of the United Nations and therefore cannot be bound by its agreements. The broadcast demanded a seat in the Organization for Communist China, and added in a friendly tone that the United States had destroyed "the political and geographical dividing line" represented by the 38th Parallel in Korea with the offensive into the North last October. Meanwhile the Chinese continued the "cease-fire" decided by themselves on the evacuation front of the U.N. forces in Hungnam. where for the third consecutive day the Communists' groping attacks were carried out by elements of two North Korean divisions. The radio broadcast said: ■ "The Chinese Government pleaded for the early settlement of the Korean ¡war and again proposed that it be (Continued on page 20, Col. 1)
According to the Commissioner of the Interior's statement to a member of the House of Representatives, there are many bridges on the Island that are in a similar condition to the one on Highway 3 in the jurisdiction of Carolina, which recently collapsed under the weight of a truck driving a shovel. According to information obtained by an editor of EL MUNDO, Interior Commissioner Jorge J. Jimenez made the above revelation to Representative Leoncio Santaella Leon, chairman of the House Public Works and Public Lands Committee, on occasion when the Committee was to investigate the conditions of the Military Highway in the vicinity of Arecibo. Commissioner Jimenez, according to what we were informed, did not say if measures were being taken to avoid a repetition of what happened on the Carolina bridge, in whose accident a worker lost his life; nor did he indicate which bridges were in the same conditions as the one mentioned on Highway 3, limiting himself to affirming that there are many other bridges in similar conditions to that one, Representative Alvaro Rivera Reyes filed a motion in the last hours of the extraordi(Continued on page 10, Col. 4)
West Sends Russia Notes with Terms for Conference
By DONALD J. GONZALES WASHINGTON, Dec. 22 - (FU) - The United States, Great Britain and France today outlined to Russia the terms for a conference of the foreign ministers of the four great powers on the tense world situation. The notes, although similar, were delivered separately to Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko in Moscow at 10:00 a.m. today. As a diplomatic courtesy, the Western powers agreed to wait until 10:00 p.m. Eastern time before releasing the texts of the notes in Moscow at 10:00 a.m. this morning.
* The texts of the notes in Washington, London and Paris were released. It was learned from well-informed sources that the notes propose informal meetings of the representatives of the Big Four at the United Nations in New York to explore the possibility of reaching agreement on an agenda, place and date for the formal conference of the four foreign ministers. The theory is that the preliminary meetings in New York would clearly demonstrate whether there is reason to expect fruitful results" at a meeting of the four chancellors.
Guards Were Selling Rum In Prison
Resignations Asked From More Than Twenty Ademán They Carried Weapons And Drugs - 100 Prenon To Be Paroled By BEÑJAMñFgÁNTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer More than 20 prison guards have been asked to resign as a result of the "scandalous state of corruption discovered in the Penitenderla Insular", as reported yesterday by the Department of Justice. * As of yesterday "only nine have tendered their resignations, according to the Attorney General, Vicente Gdlgel Polanco, after the following irregularities were pointed out, among others": 1-The illicit sale of rum by the "prison guards" to the inmates, at $4.45 cents a barrel. 2-The introduction of sharp weapons and marijuana cigarettes into the penitentiary by prison guards. 3-The practice of beating prisoners, putting them in dungeons and then getting them out by paying money. On the other hand, it was reported yesterday that 100 prisoners have been released on parole and that Mr. Jo "é S. Alegría has been appointed President of the Board of Pardons. Detail* of Investigation Mr. Cario" J. Faure, assistant attorney general in function" of special prosecutor, has been directing the investigation at the Pre "idio. with the cooperation of the Interim Superintendent of Penal Institutions, Mr. Felix Rodriguez Higgins. Other officials of Juaicla are also cooperating: Conrad Caye, Acting Mayor; and Miguel Angel Polanco and Roberto J. Todd Arla", of the Bureau of Corrections. In connection with this investigation, the Attorney General stated yesterday the following: "The Attorney General has taken the measures advisable in each case to put an immediate end to the irregularities and to correct any practice contrary to law. The executive officers of the Institution, responsible for serious misconduct, have been removed from their posts. In addition, the corresponding disciplinary measures have been imposed on the inmates who have incurred in violations of the regulations and practices contrary to the proper functioning of the institution. One of the most serious problems with which the Department of Justice has been confronted in connection with the Penitentiary relates to the conduct of several members of the Penitentiary Guard. The investigation ordered by the Attorney General has revealed that it was prison guards who conducted the illegal business of selling rum in the Presidio. Rum barrels of forty and fifty cents (Continued on page 20. Col. 2).
Indications Already Crossed the 38th Parallel
Skirmishes Across the Front Near Chunchin Three Battalions Rammed into the 8th Army By Rutheford M. Poet* TOKYO, "Abado, December 23 (FU) Ten to twelve Communist divisions were maneuvering today along an 80-mile front north of Seoul, ready to launch at any moment a formal offensive aimed at driving the Koreans out of Korea. Field and headquarters dispatches abounded in descriptions of the indications that the Chinese will attack under the full moon of Christmas Eve tomorrow. The Chinese have taken advantage of the full moon on two occasions to launch major offensives in Korea. General Dougins MacArthur announced that the Chinese" conducted numerous" groping" * along the 38th Parallel, which runs 30 mlllaa north of Seoul He warned that 1* ofenalv* against the Eighth Army was Imminent, and Implicitly said that 1* Chinese vanguard had already penetrated into South Korea. Borlcuea Repulsed Attack The Third* Divlalon of the United "t "do" repulsed numerous" attack" on the outer lines of the Hungnam beachhead. In one of the most prolonged eicaramuzai" on the coast of northeastern Korea, the communists" fought for a "fabric hour" against the" Puerto Rican "unldade", They retreated in the early hours of Friday morning under the counterattacks of the" soldiers, and the pulverizing bombardment of the" land and naval "caftones". The North Koreans, to whom the Chinese have entrusted the attack on the beachhead, increased the intensity of their probing on Thursday night, the quietest day for U.S. troops since they withdrew to the coast. "I have a hunch that they are getting ready to lunge at us," said the officer of a regiment in a dispatch from the beachhead. MacArthur announced that 1a (Continued on page 20. Col. 7) Registrants Must Report Study All persons classified as 4-F are required to report to their respective Selective Service boards any change in their academic status, according to a memo given to the press yesterday by Selective Service headquarters in San Juan. It reports that in numerous cases the classification of 4-F registrants has been based on lack of sufficient academic preparation. It adds that "as is the case". Col. 3
The General Supply Administration yesterday set maximum prices for butter and increased the maximum price at which beans are sold to the consumer. The maximum prices fixed for lard, for the consumer, are as follows: Pure lard, loose, 22 cents per pound. 22 cents per pound; packaged in cartons or one-pound packages. 23 cents, packed in four pound cans", P8 cent" can; packed in 5 pound cans and me (Continued on page 20, Col. 5).
Returns to Corozal Teniente Tells of exploits in Korea
He is in his hometown of Corozal, on an emergency pass to visit his ailing father, First Lieutenant Jose M. Aponte, leader of the Second Platoon of Company C of the First Battalion of the famous Puerto Rican Regiment. In an interview with one of our editors at his residence in Corozal, Lieutenant Aponte recounted some of his experiences in the Korean War, where the brave soldiers of the Borlcuas covered themselves with glory. A veteran of World War II, this Puerto Rican soldier commands a unit whose members have christened it Patrulla del Toro (Bull Patrol). The unit acquired this name after a military experience in which it was for the first time under heavy enemy fire, and during which our compatriots had to "recruit" a bull to carry the weapons perched on a steep hill. Aponte told us about the feat of a Puerto Rican nurse from one of the platoons of C Company,
i?';.-. \ IR" A ' : : : S '' ' 1/' i : ■'i? ' I k TENIENTE JOSE M. APONTE who, wounded twice by the enemy, attended to his wounded compatriots in the heat of the fight during a whole night" and healed his wounds himself.
Lieutenant Aponte is a civil engineer, graduated in 1948. He is the son of Mr. Carmelo Aponte, a very well known person in Corozal and throughout the coast. He is married to Mrs. Lilian M. da Aponte. He has no children. His first important experience occurred in the surroundings of Yonhung, in the North of Korea, in the middle of November. She reports that she went out with a patrol to a village west of that city, where, according to reports, there was a concentration of North Korean soldiers. At 4:30 p.m. they came in sight of a house, apparently serving as a Communist barracks. Nearby they saw a North Korean soldier tying his shoe. A Puerto Rican managed to apprehend him. When they went to assault the enemy barracks, they were greeted with a machine gun fire. When they ignored the order to surrender, the Borleuas answered the fire and finally managed to set fire to the house. Five soldiers were shot and killed (Continued on page 10, Col. 3),
Rio Piedras Municipality To Borrow $1,000,000 Sum To Be Dedicated To Reconstruction Of Streets.$100,000 Will Also Be Used For Cleaning Equipment For RURICO E. RO ERA Editor of EL MUNDO L" AlreldcM Interin* de Rio Piedra", doña Angeles Méndez de López, revealed yesterday to EL MUNDO when questioned on the matter, that a municipal ordinance is being prepared to borrow one million dollars, for the repair and reconstruction of the streets of Rio Piedra, and that the municipality is preparing a loan of one million dollars for the repair and reconstruction of the streets.
"NEW YORK, Dec. 22 (P. U.)- Alarmed by the growing use of narcotics" by drug addicts, the New York City Board of Public Welfare today began a study of the problem with a view to developing preventive measures". (Continued on page 20. Col. 6)
The problem is being addressed in the last few days. In the last few days" ne are carrying out repairs different" street" of Rio Piedras. The Acting Mayor said that "we are currently trying to repair the most deteriorated parts of the different municipal roads while the ordinance authorizing the indicated borrowing is being implemented". Arzuaga Street, one of the most important streets in Rio Piedras, which is on one of the sides of the Plaza de Recreo of said city, was yesterday undergoing important repairs. Another" avenue" such as Arlzmendl, Goorgettl. Vlllamil. Spain, Guayama. Plftcro, France, Mayagüez, and streets in numerous neighborhoods, are also undergoing repairs. Recognizes Deficiency* Doña Angele* Méndez de López told EL MUNDO that she recognized (continued on page 20, Col. 4.)
San Antonio Reinstated Today After Suspension Punishment
The "argento Laura San Antonio was punished by the Police Commission. The secretary of the Commission, Lieutenant Mario Anglada, informed EL MUNDO yesterday that Sergeant Laura San Antonio, who "was charged with disobedience of orders and conduct prejudicial to the good name and discipline of the Police Force, charges that were heard before the Commission last Tuesday 19, was reinstated today by the Police Commission. 1* Commission last Tuesday 19 was punished * to suffer the loss of one month and nine days salary, or "oá since she was suspended, until today, when she will be reinstated in her position as sergeant of I* Insular Police. The President of the Police Commission
Antonio Miró Sojo, reported that the Commission in issuing its resolution took into account the record of services rendered to the Uniformed Police by Sergeant San Antonio. She shook hands As reported by EL MUNDO. 1a "argento San Antonio was suspended from employment and salary and was charged, alleging by the Police Inspector, Captain José D, Rica "that she voluntarily posed for a photograph holding the hand of Pedro Albizu Campos, *p.uéeiendo en franca c*' maraderla con dicho Individual, knowing that he was (Continued on 1* page 20, Col 7)
The Enemy Groped In Hungnam
One of 3 Attacks" Lasted Six Hours" Boricua* Overcome Korean Winter Difficulties; HUNGNAM, Korea*, Dec. 22. (PU)-The Puerto Rican "oldedo" of the United States "Third Division" repulsed the strongest of the communist "tte" attack - aimed" at testing the resistance of the United Nations "soldiers" at the Hungnam beachhead. The" attacks took place on Thursday night. The attack on the Puerto Rican Jes- ,¡ fendldo sector was launched by North Koreans", from the North of the perimeter. The attack began when an enemy patrol ran into the outer lines. The North Koreans used it as a regiment. One of the three attacks lasted My hours, but a spokesman for the Third Division said they were rather tantees, than assaults by the North Koreans" were looking for a weak point in the Third Division defenses, but were re- f " chazed". The "North Koreans" were looking for a weak point in the defenses of the Third Division, but were repelled. KOREA. December 2E (PU)-The Puerto Rican soldiers fighting in Hungnam have overcome some unique problems in their efforts to adapt to the bitter North Korean winter. The "Argento Angel Rios, of San Juan, Puerto Rico, and leader of a squad in the 65th Infantart*. said today that one of his men ' came to him in 1* miñan* Friday press of great excitement, holding m metal helmet. ? The Puerto Rican private spoke of leaving his clothes in water in his helmet on 1* Thursday night. The clothes and the water "e froze him and he wished the sergeant would help. The rasó nun- z ca habla vlito ice natursl antas of arriving in Korea and wanted to taste how she could get her clothes back, ■ - * Needle Industry Continues to Boom The needle industry of Puerto Rico has had a healthy boom ' since the days preceding World War II. Til development "e has obtained notwithstanding J having increased the value of the ma- - terlalei it uses. The Puerto Rico Board of Trade in Washington reports "o- / on this situation as follows: "Moreover the products which the !n- , dustrl* manufactures have had a good market during the last ten-year period. Considered by value, Jos shipments of needle industry products from the Island to the United States increased from $13,800,000 in 1939-1940 to $13,800,000 in 1949-50. The largest gain in the prewar period was recorded in 1936 just before the first effects of the Federal Salt Act were felt, when the trade in these products was valued at $21,100,000. \ Of the five items which comprise the bulk of the industry's output today, only two - cotton and linen handkerchiefs - were reported separately in 1936, and the combined value of both items has increased from $2,300,000 to $12,000,000 in 1949-1950. ¡ . Boom in 8 Lines Three new lines-cotton gloves, silk handkerchief*, and silk ties-had a combined value of $16,400,000 in 1949-1950. 1 ; - j "These three important items* also had yn g "n increase dtf during the past economic alte, when the "abarque* da cotton glove*jle and ; of handkerchiefs i d* linen and cotton more than doubled in value, while the ' silk handkerchief* and tie" of se- * da if quintupled. "Three other lines qua qon "t> p tuyeron the bulk of 1* production of 1* the 1* Needlework Industry in 1936, totaling $16,000,000, only $2,600,000 was credited in 1949-1950. These are cotton pajamas and cotton nightshirts: children's sleep shirts and pajamas. ? children's clothing; cotton sleep shirts; skirts and belts. skirts and belts. _ 'í "í J