THE NANDO
WEATHER BRIEF FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with scattered showers during the day and at night. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 80 degrees; low, M degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 99.94 inches of mercury.
-NEW YORK, hand 31. (Pü). - Late today recorded the" "i-e guíente" temper "turu: New York, 48; Chicago, 83; Wáshlngton, 47; Miami, 7L Predictions: Temperature more h "J" between M degrees, increasingly cloudy, slightly warmer weather followed by showers in the evening or at night. Tenuteratan higher in the 50s, - s
DIARIO DB T^SeSeSÉ^la MARAÑA THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY EI. ARC
Entered as second class matter. Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN,. PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 1, 1950.
NUMBER' 13977
FIVE CENTS
YEAR XXXI
Supreme Court Acquits UPR Students of Right to Assemble
Ruling Says Complaint Did Not State Facts About Unlawful Assembly -In an important opinion issued yesterday by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, by vox of Chief Justice Angel R. de Jezús. "Following the California statute, the Supreme Court has ruled that "not every assembly where there is violent conduct, eacan* daloaa and tumult"! can qualify as an "unlawful assembly, even if that is the letter of the statute" The Supreme Court yesterday reversed the San Juan Court in the case of the "unlawful assembly, even if that is the letter of the statute".) Court of San Juan in the caao of loa jóvanea unlvcnltarios convicted by this Inferior court of an alleged crime of assembly, 'licita, during the past university strike, ■ ' Franclaco Hernandez Varga" led the defén "* dn lo" . university" Harry Garcia Domi, nlrcl, Jo "* M. Tejada. Oscar Garcia Figueroa, Orlando Rcveron and Clemente Mattel Padilla. Opinion of the Supreme The "Iguivnte e" the text of 1" opihion emlt.da yesterday by the Supreme Court: Loa peticionarlo" were ■emendado" by the Court, Municipal of Rio ledras, for an aupueato deir to of Unlawful assembly. They were arraigned before the San Juan District Court, which found them guilty," * and fined them twenty-five dollars or, in the alternative, that they serve one day in jail for each dollar of fine they failed to pay. To reverse the judgment writ of certiorari. omn in error pointed out ae drcunacribe that the complaint does not allege fact" conatitutlvoa of the crime of unlawful assembly, it proceeds an. iodo expose it the donumíe to examine it ala lúa d" the lev that defines *1 delfín that bu ahga infringed, 1.a complaint in ln ln pertinent exposes: Fact" Alleged" "...that on September 23, 1948. around" half past eleven in the morning... in the street Mu. fio" Rlvera.de Rio Píedtbs.... The "young" people and another" person" more", there and then, Henal, voluntarily and maliciously, gathered and unlawfully assembled, to protest against the actions of the Rector of the University of Puerto Rico, Mr. Jalma Benitez, carrying out said act. tumultuously, violently and disorderly, with . tuerte" and unusual" shouting, booing, and exclamations in a stentorian voice, constituting aiul accused and their associates in a scandalous demonstration of about d" five hundred (500) people", directing their steps by the referred street Muñoz Rivera, in direction to the University of Puerto Rico, with the purpose of barring the order in this educational center, and to be required by the denoun. ríante, who "* y eré for the date of the facts" an officer of the Insular Police, who was there in official functions as such, and by other agents of public order who were also present and in official functions, so that a" they would deviate by the street José de Diego or by the street Robles. yá qu" they were not allowed to do nor to approach the University of Puerto Rico and also speak totally paralyzed the transit by Muñoz Rivera Street, the here accused and their associates disobeyed, disregarded and violently defied the Indicated requirement and the orders to the effect given by 1a Insular Police, continuing their scandalous and Ümultuous march along the aforementioned Mu fl<x Rivera Street, first, and then most of the demonstrators sat down on the same street and on its sidewalks, covering it completely from sidewalk to sidewalk, thus prolonging the accused and their associates, the total paralysis of traffic for about half an hour, at the end of which they tried once again to continue their march, in a violent manner. The accused and their associates, with their conduct, caused a disturbance, even if not seriously, to the order and peace and tranquility of the entire neighborhood. "Act contrary to the law and to the Fas and Dignity of the People of Puerto Rico". Defines the Crime . The crime of unlawful assembly is defined by Article 362 of the Federal Code, as it appears in the Compilation of the Revised Statutes and Codes of Puerto Rico, 1911 edition, page 967, as follows: * IF two or more persons assemble to commit an unlawful act, and then separate without performing it, or without advancing its execution, or perform a lawful act in a tumultuous or disorderly manner, the persons so assembled shall constitute an unlawful assembly". It could be argued that since the complaint alleges that the meeting was "tumultuous, violent and disorderly," the letter continues on page 18 (Col. 6).
AGUADILLA, April 1. (By Israel Roldan Blas, correspondent) - With a violent incident ended yesterday a discussion about the BCG in the Carmen Gomez Tejora school in this town. All the teachers of the District were summoned by the Superintendent of Schools to receive instructions on the BCG vaccination at the aforementioned school. A nurse from the Health Department, assigned to that task in the Mayagüoz district, whose name she asked us not to reveal, had a clash with the teachers when she said that "all teachers are under a moral obligation to be vaccinated with BCG". 7 The nurse in question is instructing the magl "t "rlo on everything related to the BCG Vaccination Week, May 2-9. The nurse lecturer was at the
Teacher's Meeting on BCG Originated" Incident in Aguadilla
The nurse lecturer behaved at all times "in a haughty attitude", according to the comments of the teachers attending the event. When she said that "teachers are under a moral obligation to wear the BCG", teacher Marla L. Carattlnl de Santilling replied that "I understand that you are using strong and totalitarian language". To this, she replied that "everyone in Puerto Rico should be vaccinated because all the air on the island is contaminated with tuberculosis. Professor Carmen B. Zamora, widow of Zamora, indicated that she should not express it in that way, alleging that such manifestations do not do good to the tqrism on the Island. Professor Carmen M. Cordero then stated that the Department of Health should instruct its personnel "so that" their funds (Continued on page 10, Col. 8).
Muños Explains Island Evolution
■tí®. , ■ '■> t -X z.Jjw * I ' ■ SB B w ¿ - S i L mW ¿m3 ' .* v"' If 2*- ■ Is ■
The Governor of Puerto Rico, "eflor Luis Muño" Marin, gestures on Wáshlngton' while holding a" Press conference with loa journalists in the federal capital, Muño" Marin e" expected in San Juan next Monday aboard the Puerto Rico. (Associated Press photo.)
Discusses Progress Made
Since the Change of Sovereignty
Cotichiye With Philippine Minister Emilio Abello That U.S. Government Has Rendered Better Dividend
WASHINGTON, March 31, (FU)-During a conference held here by the Minister of the Philippine "Island" and the Governor of Puerto Rico, they concluded that half a century of relations with the United States has paid political and economic dividends for both peoples -■ especially --; - --- --- - - - XX nmt °'" '- e,iu ' ,rl6 " ' ' B o r i c u a C r e e e
In the course d< an after-dinner conversation, Emilio Aballo, minister at the Philippine Embassy, and Puerto Rican Governor Luí" Muñoz Marín said that lg United" State" policy" toward "u" peoples, dependent" could have been more sensible at times. *. But looking back at the achievements of their peoples during fifty years of relations with the Stars and Stripes, both said they believed that the two former Spanish colonies are far better off today than would have been possible had they gained immediate independence in 1899 or continued under Spanish rule. - Both Puerto Rico and the Philippines became territories or possessions of the United States after the Spanish-American War. By the Treaty of Parlé. proclaimed in April 1899, Spain ceded Puerto Rico to the United States and sold its sovereignty over the Philippines" for 320,000,000. p ■ Commercial Treaty The" Filipino" gained their political Independence in 194S. But its nineteen million inhabitants "Iguen more or less within the American economic union,. under the terms of a special trade treaty with this pala, which*explained in 1974. Puerto Rico has not yet decided which "tattoo" it wants. Governor Muñoz Marin has suggested that the three-thousand-four-hundred-and-fifty-square-mile island should make its decision, striving in the interim to become a kind of community, endowed with its own government - based on the pattern of the Philippines during the years it was preparing for independence. Muñoz told Abello that the experiences of the Philippines during the preparatory period had prompted him to propose "associated eitadldad" for Puerto Rico. He said that "his interest in Philippine affairs dates back to his childhood, when his father, Luis Muñoz Rivera, and Manuel Quezon, later (Contlqjla on page 18. Col. 5)
Chinese Sold as Slaves Aristides Ramos Reveals How They Make Illegal Entry from Latin Countries (NEW YORK, March 31. (PU)™ A New York detective retlradq said today that an underworld slave market, where the" Chinese workers aran sold" during the 1930's for as much as 3500 each, is probably still operating in New York City. Aristides Ramos, of Puerto Rico, a 20-year veteran of the Overseas Squadron of the ?o. Hela, spoke of the market for . Hela, spoke about the modern-day slave market in a broadcast of the "We The People" program on the National Broadcasting Company network. Ramos said that he* reported" re. clents that Chinese* nationalists are "fleeing" by the thousands from communist China to Latin American countries, indicating that the hiring of slave laborers still continues. He said that the" leaders of the smuggling circuit were arrested in 1931, but because he could not get enough evidence against them, "they were released. "And they are still working," added Ra. rnoi, . . . x "The Chinese," Ramoj asserted, "were taken to nearby Latin American countries, making it 'easy' for them to acquire visas" to enter, and then were taken "to the U.S." on ships under the U.S. flag, "rounded up like cattle in their cages." Sale of Chinese Outside the quarantine zone, they were lowered onto a boat, stuffed into burlap sacks, Ra. mos said, and then taken b some >solitary spot in the dock area, where they were herded onto trucks. He said they were kept wscondf. two in'a basement at Greenwlcn Vil. lage, until an Intermediarlo (Continued on page 18, Col. 4)
Today Begins! The 17th Census In Pto. Rico Today
Boricua Personnel To Perform Work Results Expected To Reveal A Population Plus 2,200,000 Souls By BÜBÍCo'e/rIVKRA - EL MUNDO Editor About 200,900 persons and 2,500 fine"" and parcel" will have been enumerated" daily at a. rate of approximately 330000. beginning today, Saturday, April 1, when by provision of congressional law the tenth decennial census of J950 begins. For the first time in the history of Puerto Rico, a group of Puerto Ricans" has the task of organizing the 1950 decennial cen "o". This group is led by Mr. Fel'x Me. jls*. Supervl "or for" the District of Puerto Rico, who is assisted in that Inbor" by Horacio M. Royo, Manuel Hernandez, sunervl "ore* auxiliare", and Mr. Reinaldo E. Rivera, Administrative Officer sent specifically for this work from the headquarters" of the Census Bureau in Wá*hlngton. D. C. Numerous" Puerto Rican pre,.J parados have been chosen for the work of supervision and direction of the work to be done by the 2,200 enumerators selected*. Today, by field* and town*, the" enumerators", women and men, including veterans, teachers" and non-veterans", will be knocking on the" door" of the Puerto Rican" homes" in the" home* of eronomic-*6clal information that will undoubtedly delay the 1" population, one of the "a*p?c. to* of the 1950 census, will exceed 2,200,000. Industrial and Commercial Census I. The initial work of the census includes the collection of information on population, agriculture, housing and commerce in the rural area. It was revealed that soon two more census will be carried out: a commercial one in the urban area and an industrial one in the entire island. s According to information provided by Mr. Mejias, the questions that will be asked about the population will lead to a global deícrlpclón of the population and its economic and social conditions: age, marital status, employment conditions, income, education, education, industry, municipality, municipality. In accordance with the Genie's "dlrectore", the "question" about living conditions requires information about the physical and terrain conditions of Puerto Rican households. The one that will be required about agriculture will vary according to the size of the farm. It was explained that there are doi cueitlonarlo*. One for párcelai, or "ea, finca" with cahida up to 2.9 cuerda"; and another for fin.cas. or tea, of 3 cuerda" or more". The 200-rope or larger farm questionnaires will be taken by specialist agronomists, thanks to the Puerto Rico Department of Agriculture and Commerce, the Expe. Station. (Continued on page 18, Col. 1)
Police Accused of Murder
Metro Employee Shot Dead
By Enriquo Ramiros Brau EL MUNDO Staff Writer Young Lidia Nieves Alcaraz, a ticket agent at the Metro Theater in Santurce, was shot to death last night at her residence on Bartolomé Las Catas Street, in Santurce. Police officer Jose Ramon Santos, of the Bsyamon service, was accused by prosecutor Ernesto Mlsrss Cslimsno of murder, with a fine of 110,000 pesos. It is alleged that the young woman had an amorous relationship with policeman Santos Tirado, relations that were cooled when the guard, father of three children, was killed, which, according to the prosecutor, caused jealousy in the accused killer. Antsnochs at 11:20, if neighborhood do lo callo Las Csssc fuá slsrmsdo al sscucharso, in modio of the silence do Is hors, six shots do revolver. The shots had occurred in the house number 631, rooidoncia of the Nieves Alearas family. Kl Matador The Barrio Obrero Police, commanded by Lieutenant Alejandro Oliveras, reported that agent Jose Ramon Santoe Tirado, on duty in Bayamon, with a .38 caliber revolver, fired only .shots at Lidia Nisvos /Alcaraz, 21 years old, causing his death. Two of the shots were fired at Lidia in the chest, one in the back and one in the left hand.
n]9V J policeman José Ramón Mantos TI rado, accused of murder.
The first one in the left arm and three in the back: It is reported by Mrs. Alicia Aleara" ArgUeta, 48 years old, that while she was returning from the circus with her daughter Lidia, at 11:13 p.m., they met Santos Tirado on Borinqusn Avenue, who took her by car to his house. At the time of saying goodbye to the guard, he allegedly called." Lidia, saying: "Come here, I have to start working." Then he shot him, and Lidia fell to the floor, lifeless. The motive From the investigation carried out by the prosecutor Mitres CgHmano, it is clear that San'os Tirado and Lidia Nieves were boyfriend and girlfriend. However, the fact that Lidia found out that Santos Tirado was now married with children, was giving another direction to their relationship. A sister of Lidia reported that Santos Tirado had gone to the house to look for her, without two sessions, and that she noticed that the policeman was quite nervous. * Among the witnesses who testified before prosecutor Miaros Colimano were Allqja Alearas ArgUeta, mother of the deceased; Patricia Oonzálss Rodríguez, Laura Nieves and other relatives. The guard was arrested at stop 19 and taken to the Barrio Obrero quan , ' tol. I The precautions taken by the Olivera" tennisnto" and the (Continued on 18 Col. t)
Crawford Urges Prudent Fiscal Standard.
o .■... ' -W B Mb* ■ j ■ * w i" - < (. ■ ■ ■ - ■ ' T /t 4Tb i i i ' ■ém - ¿ **s Ji 1 i w'. ■ s. ' ' " W ' ' X'. >4 12 ' ' ' 1 Kr Á L
Rep. Fred Crawford as he addressed" in 1" yesterday morning " the legislative chambers, meeting in joint session. From left to right: Acting Governor Vicente Gélgei Polanco; Rep. Crawford, standing at the microphone; Rep.
Crawford, standing at the microphone; House Speaker* Ernesto Ramo" Antoninl; and Senate President Samuel R. Quiñones. (Photo F.L MÚNDO.)
5§Only the 65th Regiment will remain in Puerto Rico The Army will transfer its troops to a base in Panama Little by little the Army in Pueril Rico will be a peacekeeping force. Mlle" of (rops* *are preparing to leave the Island as the de*mobilization and reorganization of the Army in the Caribbean *approaches the limit set for June 30. 1949, "egún Informó ayer el Departamento ds" Antillas, en ej Fort Brooke. For the time being, the West Indies Headquarters is undergoing the largest readjustment experienced by the Puerto Rican Army since the war. "In little more than a month," says the note, "it will lose the 504th Artillery Battalion, the 95th Artillery Battalion, the 18th Mechanized Cavalry Squadron, the 531st Combat Engineering Company, and 5 company" of service, including the headquarters detachment at San Juan. It is expected that this readjustment, plus another" now in prospect to take place before June 30 of this year, will reduce the land forces" on the island to one regiment, minus one battalion. This would be the 65th Infantry Regiment, plus the 7503rd Signal and Communications Company, which would remain at Buchanan under the direct supervision of the Panama Canal. Ceremony at Buchanan - The Cavalry Squadron and the Anti-Aircraft Artillery Battalion ~. Antiaircraft were 'disorganized* on March 27, at a ceremony held at ( Conti núx on'page 18. Ubi. 8).
\Senate Approves Several Bills On Municipalities' Debts Also Authorizes Measure Transferring Funds From San Juan To The Department Of The Interior
Nine bills authorizing "dl*tlnto" municipalities to include in their budgets amounts for the payment of debts incurred were approved yesterday in third reading by the Senate. Seven of these bills correspond to the House of Representatives, the following being the same: House P. 97 to authorize the Camuy Municipal Assembly to include in its regular budget for the 1959-51 fiscal year, $150 for the payment of debts contracted. P. S. 242, to authorize the Municipal Assembly of Barceloneta to include in "its regular budget for 1950-51, $36.15 for the payment of debt* contracted*. P. S. 394 to authorize the municipality of Sabina Grande to pay $2,239.94 to Dr. Jo "é tí. Montalvo for services rendered*. P. de la C. 395 to authorize the. Municipality of Jayuya to pay $245.32 to Dr. Lorenzo MI rauda Rosado; for services rendered. -P. of the C. 429 to authorize ■ the Municipal Assembly 'of Cabo Rojo to Jnriúlr erí' 'its budget for 1950-51,. 850a.4Q" for the payment of a contracted debt, P. of tí C/473 .p6>authorizing the Municipality dr Arrobo to pay to! doctor Luí" E, Yordán the sum" of. $909. P. de la C. 606 to authorize the municipality of Peñuelas to pay the j* fi 2£,,P* bin0 B "la*jiuidp the juma of $637.36 for service" of electricldad rendered. . They will pay Medicinas P. del S, 206 authorizing the municipality of Coamo to Include in its regular lOM-S budget? y 'Continued on page 10, C¿1. ó
They send ('.artas ; Y RegalosJPara La Palomilla Some are romantic missives. - Géigel 1 Teme Leyenda Novelesca i Addressed to José Aníbal Gerena ■ Lafontaine, alia" La Palomilla, have > been received eh la Penitenciarla Tnsular hundred* of letter", gift* and messages, coming" from all over the l "la: The Acting Governor and Attorney General, Lic. Vicente Géigel Polanco, has warned against the danger that a novel and romantic legend is being woven around the Palomilla prison. The latter could be very harmful to the prisoner and to the administration of justice in Puerto Rico. . All" letters," gifts and men-aje" addressed" to "La Palomilla, are reviewed" by the Superintendent "of the Presidio, Mr. Felix R. Rsvera, remaining then under "u custody, "in entregársele" to La Palomilla.' Geréna Lafontaine hontlnúa improving of the" bullet wounds that reclblera during "u spectacular escape of two "emanas by varied" "ectores of i" Island. No Portrait Allowed An editor of EL MUNDO asked the Acting Attorney General, Jose C. Aponte, for permission to take a photograph of the pile of letters, messages and gifts, - The fiacal Aponte did not want to assume responsibility for this permission and decided to consult the matter with Governor Géigel Polanco, who denied it. Géigel alleged that a photograph of this nature "could stimulate and provoke romanticism and sympathy" for La Pajomllla", which could be detrimental to him and to the provision of justice, he said. To this our editor replied that it would all depend on how the matter was approached, nor how the information was written. Autograph Reportedly among the* hundred* of letters* addressed to La Palomilla (Continued on page 10, Col. 5)
By JAMES F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, March 31. - (PU) - A trial examiner" of the National Labor Relations Board today accused the workers of the Ponce Cement Company of refusing "to bargain collectively in good faith" with their employers. "It recommended that the workers be ordered to stop trying to alter their present labor contract in violation of federal law. Examiner J. J. Fitzpatrick, in a recommendation to the NLRB, said that the Ponce Cement Industry Workers' Union spoke under the National Labor Relations Act when it went on strike on August 15 and remained on strike until August 22. The union's labor contract, Fitzpatrick said, contained "a no-strike clause" and was in effect until December 31.
Speaking Yesterday Before Insular Chambers Warns Against Fixed Expenses That Seatf Permanent Remorse - By Tarta Mánche* Cappa Editor of EL MUNDO > Rep. Fred Craürford yesterday warned the legislative chambers to maintain a lean policy, in line with possible "revese" "dinner. * mico* eh the fulurq. Eíperificamsnte. r the congressman Urged the Legislature not to overburden "1 taxpayer by creating fixed gRMts* qu" are permanent" even during 1^ time of economic advar(sided I "because-they may >itrellarse against 1a" rock"". The Republican, do X Michigan spoke before joint session of the Houses, held to hear him, yesterday morning. In his speech, the cnngreal "ta v! In his speech, the speaker urged that Puerto Rico's economic conditions be solidified by "fighting the battle of production" to continue to advance, "without letting anything destroy the progress we have made so far. > - Island Must Prepare" w] He stated on this point that "up to now everything has been rosy," but that the Island must be firmly anchored, so that the effects of an economic storm do not destroy the progress achieved in the Industrialization area. He said he was satisfied and pleased with the progress made in the industrialization efforts, when he began his speech by reporting on his visit to several manufacturing plants. He then referred to the message to the Legislature by Governor Muñoz Marín, as one of the "greatest" of the "greatest" speeches he delivered before a legislative body. -He emphasized the fact that "the progress achieved in the field of Industrialization is a great asset to the Congress, "ohre' the quality of Puerto Rico and the Puerto Rican individual. He then pointed out the "benefit" that the Island will derive from the "fuer¿a. It was then that he issued a warning "about the adoption of an economic and tax policy aimed at avoiding the creation of tax overloads" with permanent fixed charges "that could cause a disaster". He mentioned the influx of capital to the Island, and the investment in plant and machinery; the fact that the Island lacks natural resources and large tracts of arable land, but nevertheless enjoys a great labor force. He also pointed out that the Government is carrying out public works", with an increase in fixed" and permanent", paid" for" by" the" Treasury, bunion's lmpye "tá" to the taxpayer". "r>e tutade" moment has been successful"- he declared, to pre. gunt then: "How can "er all this in lo* afio" to come""!"! So far, everything has been going well "* - he continued - "you are enjoying your "it®-. - He went on to say that "you are enjoying an ideal situation, with a great influx of income", and then stated that "it may be a difficult situation", so you must remain alert. Turning to the sugar problem, Crawford reiterated his view that domestic consumption of sugar should be supplied by the domestic sugar producing areas, including Puerto Rico, Hawaii and V'rgenei Island; he stated that there should be no limitation on the supply of these domestic areas, except as imposed by the nation's consumption power. He added that *1 the consumption au- * * mentare, this increase should be distributed among the* area" dqméitlcas, and that if any deficiency should result, it should be covered first by Cuba, and secondly. i (Continued on page 18, Col, 7);
JNRT Examiner Accuses Union / Ponce Cement Violating Agreement
The Compartía could terminate f o! contract only "i gave, -a thirty day notice". Contrary to the Union's/Union President Luis Olmo's contention, the examiner concluded that the August strike in Ponce was authorized by the Union on August 10, and on August 14, Lula Olmo announced that he was going to begin a strike. Meeting in San Juan "Olmo's testimony that he took no part in the proceedings, except to try to discourage the order for a strike in Ponce," said Fltzpi.trick, "is not credited, but is not credible. is credited, ospeclalment® having reliable testimony that on the same Sunday morning Olmo had attended a meeting of the Unión de' Trabajadora" da Puerto Rico in or near San Juan, on which occasion he announced that the" Ponce workers would also strike on August quine® day "in solidarity" with the Island Government workers, (Continued on page 18, CoL 4).
■