THE
* WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE ISLAND. TODAY: Considerable high clouds with a few scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:00 p.m., 80.01 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Junte M. (PU). - In the afternoon of today m tafororaron 1m rtguiontao temporaturaa: New York, 76; Chicago, 78; Wáahingten, 76; Miami, 96. Predicdonoo for tomorrow in New York and doubted vedaaoi mn* yomioato clear, eon the temperatara nado high corea do 89.
DIARIO
THE MARANA
A and THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY ABC
YEAR XXXI
FIVE CENTS)
U.S. Soldiers Will Go Into Action in Korea; MacArthur Prepares to Send Troops Quickly
>0 ■ 1 ■- " ' ..y . ....-teto Wk fe? ?.¿ w: BS B A - ? ' til*' wBBr '
This photograph of General Deuglaa MacArthur was taken upon his arrival at Hanada Airport, near Toldo, after visiting the war front in South Korea. Below is a picture of General MacArthur surrounded by some members of his staff as he observed the situation of the defending South Korean troops near Seoul. The general risked his life by approaching the line of fire to observe the operations better. Bus advisers tried to convince him of the riskiness of his attempt, but the general insisted on reaching the war front itself to encourage the troops and show them that they were not alone in their efforts to drive the invaders out of the territory of democratic Korea. (PA Radio photo.)
2 ' 1-'12 ' ■ - - - - --
Lucas Castro Anguila's lawyers will begin hearing on Monday the motion for transfer presented by the lawyers of Lucas Castro Anguila, who the prosecution accuses of eight murders and two attempts on his life, resulting from the fire at the Almacenes Palou, in San Juan. Felix Ochoteco, Castro Anguila's main defense attorney, said yesterday that on Thursday afternoon the defendant had learned that prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez had collected 201 affidavits from jurors to support his contention that there is no prejudice against the defendant in the San Juan courts that could prejudice his right to a fair or impartial trial, as alleged in the defense motion. i' On the other hand, he said that the defense attorneys have in their possession 18 affidavits from people who affirm the contrary, they would ask the court to subpoena the 201 people who swore affidavits before the prosecutor, to be interrogated in court. Prosecutor Viera Martinez said he had no objection to this, but insisted that the defense pay the 201 witnesses' expenses. The defendant's attorneys, who had originally opposed paying the witnesses' expenses, finally accepted the proposal 1 (Continued on p. IB, col. 8).
U.S. Air Force Prepares Offensive Against North Korean Targets Military Spokesman Says Truman Decision Facilitates Bombing. Troops in Japan To Be Transported WASHINGTON, June 30 (PU)-A military spokesman said today that President Truman's decision to allow bombing of military targets in North Korea will make the work of American airmen easier, enabling them to attack enemy bases before Communist planes take off. ,
The spokesman told a news conference at 3 p.m. that U.S. planes supporting the South Koreans will attack bases, ammunition and supply depots and all recognized military targets, including troop movements. An Army spokesman said Mistar officials had dismissed the previous belief that the South Koreans could stop the communists with air support alone. He stated that the South Korean Army was organized for internal security and border patrol purposes, and was not prepared for sustained combat against a well-organized army. As for the U.S. troops, he said they are "in full combat readiness". He assumed that General Douglas MacArthur will use all the resources at his disposal, including aircraft, to transport his ground troops to the front line. A Navy spokesman said that, although there is no information received about the involvement of U.S. naval forces, it is reasonable to assume that U.S. warships are patrolling both sides of Korea. The military spokesman reported that South Korean forces are regrouping somewhere between Seoul and Seoul.
The military spokesman reported that South Korean forces are massing somewhere between Seoul and Suwon and that they will be able to stop North Korean forces who breached the front line across the Han River below Seoul. Except for this breach, he said, the front line is "more or (Continued on page 10, Col. 1)
Two Years in Jail for Soto Zaragoza; One for Harry Lake Penn ' By Carlos Nievss Rivefa Editor of EL MUNDO Judge Francisco Torres Aguisr, of the Sjfn Jusn District Court, yesterday imposed two years in jail on Jose Soto ZarqgQgg, alias i Chichi, and one year's imprisonment on Harry Lake Pfnn, for a violation of the Bolita Law. ' The procoso followed The People accused I took yesterday J when si Ju " To > ordered >4. * .. nrucísarn ñor 4.t.cHv. p.í<'e. quign was one do 10 principal del MiJotorio ptocaL ai fisco! Mitres Calláeno.6 inmsdiataments ol aros' t0 . .do! detective Quiñotes, quiet at the time testified d""i* the oilla log witnesses, fr J *" c lole fiansa do *10,000 paét P od ír nítutanecer en libertad " - raed* mm i f<l paratramitar la ap k . C B da 1 a diefia sentence I "Ktra Zrtgoza and Harry ha f Wenn. potjuxgar that ¿ha k -'Belationaería vicious. 9or ' Banto ndiabía no u". Kón tuitaéal de derocMquo ■meritara iapt1ación. r Bt" taken pe la aB>rte contid detect! vejuireaAiió al hed do page 14 ol. 3>
- Senate Approved $1,222,500,000 : For Arms Against Communism.
' By John L. STEELE Washington, June so (pu>1 A Senate conscious of the Korean war crisis । approved the sum of , *1,222,500,000 to provide new arms aid to nations resisting Communist aggression, and some senators said more funds may be needed soon in view of the Korean situation. - The bill, which passed by a unanimous vote of 66 to 0, now goes to the House of Representatives, which is expected to take up the bill. House of Representatives, which is expected to take immediate action when it returns from an unofficial vacation of ten days. The bill will then go to President Truman. > Shortly before the final vote, the Senate defeated a proposal by Senator Harry P. Cain, R-Washington, to strike out funds for Korea. He said that the
amount provided was "wholly inadequate" and should be re-examined. The bill, the most concrete action taken so far by Congress to support President Truman's aid to Korea, would allow him to use up to $8200,000,000 to support South Korean forces against Communist invaders in North Korea. The unusual unity action took place after the President decided to send American troops into South Korea to stop the Red Invasion. Voting in favor of the bill were persistent critics such as Sen. Robert A. Taft, R-Ohio, Senate Republican leader Kenneth S. Wherry, R-Nebraska, and Senator Harry F. Byrd, D-Virginia. (Continued on page 14, page 8).
B-29 Aircraft Attack Han River Area
U.S. Officers Withdraw to U.S. Air Force South Korea Attempts to Stop Red Advance in its Territory By Earnewt Hobetocht TOKYO, July 1 (PU) - It has been reported that General MacArthur is preparing to intensify the dispatch of American combat troops to Korea to counter the Communist armed attack across the main lines of defense in South Korea. TOKYO, Saturday, July 1. (P. U.) - Dispatches from Taejon, Korea, indicated today that American troops are already landing in South Korea. B-29 type bombers were already pounding Red positions along the Han River, scene of Red penetration, and it was maintained that General MacArthur would soon send American soldiers to fight the Communist tanks - he has not done so. Persistent rumors circulated that the First Cavalry Division had been put on standby to be sent to Korea, but an official spokesman said that this famous combat unit was not preparing for such an action, adding: "As far as I am concerned, I can say that it will not be for some time. American and Korean officials in Suwon, Korea, said today that the South Korean fighters need tanks, with greater urgency than any other weapon, in their war against the Communist invaders. Lnloas News Hours after President Truman's announcement that "certain ground units in South Korea need tanks more urgently than any other weapon in their war against the Communist invaders. Truman's announcement that "certain ground support units" would be sent to Korea, no official notification has yet been obtained as to the use to which this new authority would be put by the Supreme Allied Commander. It is perhaps significant that the customary midnight briefing from MacArthur Headquarters has not been issued today. As late as 4:00 a.m., the only news available on U.S. operations was a communiqué issued by the Air Force. A military spokesman at Wahlng.ton said that the Republican forces, massing after the Communist advance, were regrouping somewhere between Seoul and Suwon, 20 miles from the captured capital. He added that the Republican forces were holding Inchon, a port city 20 miles west of Seoul, but that he did not know if the Republican position was strong enough to permit the landing of military equipment for the OGriSteroreVo" forces in that area. He said his army was counterattacking in Seoul and was outside the city. Communist radio reported, meanwhile, that the Red Forces had achieved some minor successes in the Inchon area. The IpiHtar jjortavor, when asked whether Lieutenant Commander MacArthur would send troops by air to Korea, said that the Supreme Commander of the Far East would probably "use all his means" to get the men to where they are needed. It is likely that General MacArthur will first send anti-tank units to combat the heavy vehicles which have been the effective weapon of the North Koreans. It is also thought possible that the General will send medium tanks to establish spearheads in the southern counterattacks. A spokesman at Allied Headquarters announced today that between 40 and 50 armed vehicles have been launched across the Han River at a point southeast of Seoul, threatening the main highway south of the city's capture of Suwon. The Air Force communiqué states that fifteen tanks were destroyed by fighter planes accompanying the superfortresses in the raid on the Han River, but could not specify whether these planes were part of the forces that are trying to destroy the Han River (see p. 14, col. 5).
House Passes Constitution Bill
Truman Muñoz Marín Urges Vote on Referendum. Advises Citizens By JAMES F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, June 30. - (PU) -> The House overwhelmingly approved the measure authorizing Puerto Ricans to draft their own Constitution, thus becoming a kind of community affiliated with the United States. The local government of the Island is currently organized under the Organic Charter. The Constitution bill would preserve sections of the Organic Charter, which define the Caribbean territory's relationship with the Federal Government. But it allows Puerto Rican voters to organize their local government according to a Constitution of their own making. Congress only stipulated that the Constitution provide for "a republican form of government" and include a "Bill of Rights." Approval followed an hour of debate on the House floor. It passed, without amendment. The Senate approved it a little less than a mea. In a five-minute speech, Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernóe' Isern said that "the current arpiraylwM <M people of Puerto #Ue. satan embodied in this bill," f Fernóe said that Puerto Ricans understand that they cannot obtain either independence or statehood at the present time. Referring to the Constitution bill, Fernó" said that "it is not independence; Puerto Rico will continue to be represented in Congress by its Resident Commissioner. It is not independence. Puerto Ricans" will continue to proudly hold U.S. citizenship, in common allegiance with our continental brothers for our common institutions". American Labor's Vito Marcan toi nlo, a New York American, denounced the measure as aimed at luring Puerto Ricans to accept a state of perpetual co| loniallsm and political servitude. . Lo Endosaron 78 f - Fernóe told eus Colleagues that the nftyorority political party of , the Island, which he reproounta here, fully eni dosed the proportion. Do " (Continued on p. 16, col. 1)
trio to Detective in a Ball Case í- I - ; 1 Jl " W jB/C ? Detective Federico QuiltaMM, who was accused yesterday of perjury by Oellmano, by fundamentally varying his d* dároste® ortgteaL "m ol eawo that"- followa against José Boto Zaragooa, l arates S-titease OhtehL (Fete EL MUNIKk) ■Tí' "IW ' ---i , i- - ->
Air Commander In Far
if ' Lieutenant General George E, Stratemeyer is e| commander of General MacArthur's air forces in Asia. He was in charge of the operations withdrawn by American aviation from Chinese territory in the last stages of the World War I. (Associated Press photo). PONCE, June ~30.~(By Miguel 1 Rivera) - Health and Municipal authorities held a meeting to discuss the situation of "realengo" dogs in the city. 1 The meeting was prompted by the confirmed case of rabies, which occurred in this city. As reported on June 5, in the Seboruco neighborhood of Central Mercedlta, a propledgd.de Gregorio Borrero dog bit Alejo Ra1 moa Lugo, Luz Maria Borrero and 1 another boy of the family- BorreThe dog, without any apparent caution, had a fit of rage and killed the aforementioned people and other animals, notifying Mr. . Borrero to the' Police. The Sanitation officers sacrificed the animal, sending the head to the Biological Laboratory of the Health Department, giving negative results in the first instance. The samples were sent to the Anti-Rabies Institute of Alg- ) bama, where it was confirmed as a positive case. - (Continued on page 18, Col. 8)
Judiciary Reform Comes into Force
District Court Abolished Géigeí Extended All New Appointments Under New Law By BEÑJAMÍÑ~8ANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer All district, municipal and peace courts were abolished today, to be replaced by a single court at each of these levels, throughout the territory of Puerto Rico. The reorganization of the judiciary is in effect since early this morning at 12:01 a.m., in accordance with Law Number 432, approved on May 15, 1950. Yesterday were made Iss appointments of all judges, secretaries, deputy secretaries, bailiffs and other personnel who had been serving in the former courts, which have been converted into chambers and sections. The Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, told EL MUNDO yesterday that he expected from these officials "the maximum effort and the greatest possible cooperation for the success of the reorganization." He further expressed his hope that "the administration of justice in Puerto Rico will now be done more quickly and without many of the technicalities that often affected it before." The Juagado Do Paa Doce de Uas anta cortea de paz have qwdsJo ethnlnned, functioning enera 42 chambers of the Juzgado de Páz de Puerto Rico in munk-fpios that do not have capitality with one or more chambers of the Municipal Court. (Continued on page 10, Cbl. 4) Local Reaction Is Optimistic In Case Of Korea No Obstante, Population Tries To Adopt Measures In Case Of Rationing By s. galv eFmaturana Editor, EL MUNDO ' The local reaction to the threat of another world war, caused by the disturbing news from the Korean front, has been rather optimistic, although saturated with a large dose of foresight. Countless people, including professionals, industrialists, merchants and workers, whose reactions were picked up by EL MUNDO, do not hide their concern about the development of events in Korea. In general terms, the situation has been welcomed as something to be expected and towards which, sooner or later, it would have to come. Nevertheless, the population has begun to prepare for the least possible inconvenience, should rationing of goods be decreed at any moment. Numerous housewives are breaking into stores in search of those items that were in short supply during the last world war, as a means of securing their possession for the future. This situation is readily apparent in the clothing and shoe stores, whose sales in the last five days have been very low, and whose sales in the last five days have been very low.
Truman Gave Order To Use Troops
Navy to Blockade Korean Coast Authorized to Bomb Targets in North. Troops Offered to U.N. For ROBERT BARKDOLL " WASHINGTON, June 2, (PU>E1 President Truman today ordered * American combat troops to be used in the Korean war against the North Korean invaders, and authorized the Air Force to bomb military targets in enemy territory. He also ordered the No. 1 Navy to conduct a war effort that will thwart any amphibious operation to deliver North Korea controlled by the FUROS. Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson said the orders-transmitted to General MacArthur before the President's announcement-are already being carried out. This means that American soldiers are fighting, or soon will be. T apparently the Air Force was already in action. The North Koreans claimed that 27 Wtoamorlean B-21 suporforta* 1ezas bombed their capital, Pyonf" yang, Thursday night. Apparently leo ordoneo were transmitted to MacArthur on Thursday afternoon, after §1 Supreme Allied Commander in Tokyo reported on his flight from Ino. pardon to the war zone. The President met early today with the U.S. Combined Chiefs of Staff. Then, before making his announcement, he called his Cabinet and Republican and Democratic congressional leaders to conference and informed them of his decision. The White House snunclo do White House learned that MacArthur had been authorized to use "certain spoyo ground units"-a phrase which Secretary of the Army, Frank Paco, Jr., said speaks side decidedly brings careful considera-, clone. J. "Broader" Order Questioned as to whether this meant that we "are using ground troops" in Coros, Defense Secretary Louis Johnson replied that Truman's earlier order, directing aid to the U.S. air and naval forces, "involved only groups of specialists - this one is broader? He would not elaborate on his words. It was presumed that this slgnlfieaM that Infantry forces would enter the battle, and that MaoArthur had them already, or would have them there as quickly as possible. Major General Ravmond Hufft, Commanding General of the Louisiana National Guard, predicted that 40,000 U.S. troops would be sent to Korea, including the First Cavalry (Infantry) Division in Japan. There are 10,000 men in the First Cavalry Division, and Hufft believed they would be supported by 30,000 vice troops. The seriousness of the situation in South Korea was made clear by Tokyo dispatches saying that the North Korean Reds had passed from forty to fifty armored vehicles "across the Han River, south of Seoul, the capital of South Korea, Military observers here said that only United Nations troops could change the course of the war - and that the bulk of the forces would have to be sent by the United States, so Johnson was asked about it (Continued on page 10, Col. 5>|
New Mexican-Made Vaccine Effective Against Rabies
The Laboratories of the National Institute of Hygiene, Mexico, have prepared a vaccine of high immunological value to protect the shoulder against rabies, which is effective against canine rabies. Dr. Aurelio Malaga, in charge of the rabies control program at the U.S.-Mexico border, who was here recently investigating the rabies outbreaks in Puerto Rico, took samples to the prepared batches for study at the Pan American Sanitary Bureau. Dr. Malaga Alba belongs to the Veterinary Public Health Section of the aforementioned office, attached to the Regional Office for the Americas of the World Health Organization. Vaccine Prepared This rabies vaccine for human rabies was prepared in the United States of America.
This rabies vaccine for human use was prepared at the Rabies Laboratories of the National Institute of Hygiene of Mexico, with the cooperation and technical assistance of the Pan American Sanitary Bureau. According to an official communiqué from that office, it conforms to the requirements established by the National Institute of Hygiene of the Public Health Service of the United States. The Pan. J the following about the vaccine: "The tests of control f 1 potency of this vaccine have shown that they have been prepared in accordance with the minimum requirements established for the vaccine. The minimum qullsltos established by the Department of Oil Control of the National Institute of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, U.S.A.".
Entered aa second class matter, Port Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 1, 1950
NUMBER 14066