THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY" - Medium cloudy with some showers in the morning and early afternoon, increasing cloudiness and showers in the late afternoon and early evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 87 degrees; low, 75 degrees. Sea level barometric pressure at 4:80 p.m., 28.92 inches of mercury.
NEW YOBK, Oct. 6. (PU). -Kn 1* afternoon today the following temperatures were reported: New York, 61; Chicago, M; Washington, 66; Miami, 76. Forecasts for* New York and neighboring cities: mostly good and pleasant..... Temperatures just over 70.
MARANA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
YEAR XXXI
stored as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
'pEntered Post (
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 7, 1950
NUMBER 14163
FIVE CENTS
State Department Joins in Congratulating THE WORLD
E. Miller Emphasizes Role of the Island C o r d i a Messages Recognizing Work of this Newspaper By WILLIAM DORVILLIER WASHINGTON, Oct. 6. - (Special to EL MUNDO - The State Department and the National Press Club formally congratulated our President and General Manager, Mr. Angel Ramos, and EL MUNDO on the occasion of the announcement by Columbia University, awarding this newspaper and its President, the Maria Moors Cabot Award. Edward G. Miller, Jr, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, congratulated Angel Ra* moa and EL MUNDO "wholeheartedly". For his part, Raciford E., President of the National Press Club, spoke at a press conference on the occasion of the announcement of the Maria Moors Cabot Award. In statements on behalf of the State Department, Mil* ler said, "Puerto Rico, geographically, historically and culturally, is extraordinarily gifted to contribute to better understanding and friendship among the Spanish-speaking and English-speaking peoples of this hemisphere. "There is, therefore, special justification in conferring one of the Marta Moors Cabot Awards on a Puerto Rican newspaper and its publicist. "I wholeheartedly congratulate Mr. Angel Ramos and EL MUNDO as recipients of such an encouraging recognition of the Island's importance in hemispheric relations." Congratulation Do Mobley Mobley said the Cabot Award is "one of the highest honors a publisher and newspaper in this hemisphere can receive. "EL MUNDO, situated as it is between two continents, is in the midst of the politics of good neighborliness and has shown, through its fair and accurate presentation of the news of the governments of North and South, that it greatly deserves this high recognition. "As President of the National Press Club I am sure I express the pride of the membership in congratulating a member of the journalistic fraternity who, through his progressive performances, has done honor to the entire journalistic world. On behalf of the National Press Club I heartily congratulate publicist Angel Ramos and EL MUNDO for doing their duty well." The Marla Moors Cabot Awards are given annually for "outstanding contributions to understanding among American nations." The convocation will take place at Columbia University on October 10, when EL MUNDO will be presented with a silver Marla Moore Cabot plaque, and a gold medal to Don Angel Ramos as publicist. They Send Congratulations Since we brought to the pals the news that EL MUNDO and its President and General Manager, Don Angel Ramos, had received the Moors-Cabot award, we have been receiving constant demonstrations of appreciation and congratulations. By telephone, by cable, by telegraph, by letter and personally we have received hundreds of messages of support. Needless to say how we are compelled and encouraged by these expressions, some of which we begin to publish today. Part of them are addressed to our President, Mr. Ramos, and part to the Director, Mr. Pablo Vargas Badillo, and read as follows: "My dear friend, allow me to congratulate you on having been awarded the Moors Cabot Prize by Columbia University, an honor that is extended to the whole of Puerto Rico. "I wish you life and vigorous health and a growing wise vision, so that you may continue to conquer triumphs for yourself and our Island." - Emilio de! Toro. "Dear Angel: "I wish to extend to you my most sincere congratulations on the high honor conferred on you by Columbia University "1 in awarding you the Moors Cabot Prize, "I understand the satisfaction you must have experienced in receiving this distinction, not only for what it represents for you personally, but for the importance for the island of Puerto Rico of having the intellectual value of its men recognized. Miguel Such, vice-president Bull Insular Une, San Juan. "Very dear and good friend: Last night we were pleasantly surprised to hear him comment on the honor bestowed on our good friend Don Angel Ramos, EL (Continued on p. 18 Col. 1) - Edward Miller, Deputy Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department of the Treasury.
Edward Miller, Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs, congratulates our President, Mr. Angel Ramon, on the occasion of the awarding to him and EL MUNDO of the Moors Cabot Award and plaque. In his congratulations, Mr. Miller highlights Puerto Rico's Inter-American role. New Triumph / Yankee Over Phillies, 3 to 2 Singles by Woodling, Rizzuto and Coleman in 9" Produced the Decisive NEW YORK, Oct. 8. (PU) -The New York Yankees put themselves within one game of clinching the World Series today by beating the Philadelphia Phillies, 3-2, for the third consecutive day, with the nervousness of the young Philadelphia players playing an almost decisive role in the setback. With stopper Russ Meyer on the mound do! Flladelfla, and the score tied at 2 runs, the Yankees won the game in the bottom half of the ninth when, after two outs, Geno Woodling and Phil Rizzuto hit leg singles through the second baseman's plate and then Gerry Coleman hit a grounder between the left and center field. The Yankees, as in previous games, were the first to score against Philadelphia starter Ken Helntzelman. With two outs, Rizzuto received a free ticket. Coleman batting. Rizzuto came out to steal second base and when catcher Andy Semlnlck's throw went bad, the Yankees' speedy, diminutive Scooter extended to the anteroom. Colerr.an then towed him in with a single to left field, himself being out at second as he tried to stretch the hit into a double. However, the Phillies tied it in the sixth against Ed Lopat on a double by Del Ennis and a single by Dick Slsler (for both their first hit in the Series) and went in front for the first time in the Classic in the next episode, with a run produced by a double by Granny Hamner, a sacrifice d'i Andy Semlnlck and a single by Mike Goliath. But the Yankees tied it in the eighth, due to a fatal error by shortstop Hamner. With two outs, Helntzelman got out of control and drove in Coleman, Yogi Berra and Joe DiMagglo to fill the pads and bring in shortstop Jim Konstanty. Bobby Brown was then sent in to bat as a pop-up by Hank Bauer and Konstanty forced him to ground out to shortstop for what appeared to be the final out of the inning, but Hamner bobbled the ball and Coleman scored the tying run. Scoring by innings: Flladelfla 000 001 100-2 10 2 New York 001 000 011-3 7 0 Helntzelman, Konstanty (8), Meyer (9) and Semlnlck; Lopat, Ferrlck (9) and Berra. Ferrlck won and Meyer lost.
a. ■ ■ ■ - Oscar Chapman Was On Island Several Hours.
Federal Interior Secretary Goes to Meeting in the Virgin Islands By Juan Martinez Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer At 8:30 p.m. Thursday night, U.S. Interior Secretary Oscar L. Chapman arrived in San Juan, accompanied by U.S. Secretary of State Oscar L. Chapman. Oscar L. Chapman, accompanied by his wife. They were met at the airport by Governor Muñoz Marin and his wife, who made them their guests at Fortaleza where they were staying. Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern and his wife had lunch yesterday in Fortaleza with the Chapmans and Muñoz Marín. At three o'clock yesterday afternoon, Secretary Chapman and his wife left for the Virgin Islands, > Governor Muñoz Marín and his wife, Mr. Mason Barr, Chief of the Caribbean Branch of the Division of Territories and Insular Possessions, and the Governor's military aide, Colonel Alberto Arrlllaga, saw them off at the airport. Secretary Chapman, as reported to EL MUNDO, is going to St. Thomas for a meeting of the Virgin Islands Corporation, of which he is President by virtue of his office. Chapman, who was recently the subject of attacks in the U.S. Senate, to which he responded with great success, being publicly exonerated, said he is glad to have been attacked in such a way, because he was given the opportunity to prove the falsity of the rumors that were being spread against him, and that he has "plenty of punch to defend myself". Secretary Chapman stated that he has a big job in Washington; but that he had to come to the Virgin Islands because the law of the Bear Islands Corporation makes it mandatory to hold a directors' meeting in October. The Secretary expressed that in spite of the enormous work of the last few days and his fight against his misguided detractors, he feels in good health and happy; but that he would like to be able to spend some days of rest in this Puerto Rico that he likes and attracts him so much. He announced that if possible, upon his return to the Virgin Islands, he will stop for a few days here, with his good friends. Secretary Chapman, from the first time he came to this island, won the sympathy of those who treated him, especially the reporters who cover La Fortaleza, with whom he was always very kind and gave them every opportunity to obtain information. The current U.S. Secretary of the Interior has been involved for many years with Puerto Rican affairs and is one of the top federal officials who most frequently visits Puerto Rico, * i ■ Mr. Chapman was Deputy Secretary of the Interior under Harold L. Ickes, who delegated to Mr. Chapman the handling of most of the island's affairs.
Cafetal Wage Hearing Held Wednesday in Lares
By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA i Editor of EL MUNDO ' The Minimum Wage Board will hold a public hearing next Wednesday to consider the setting of provisional minimum wages for agricultural workers in the coffee industry. At the hearings, to be held in Lares, interested parties will be able to testify on the minimum wages suggested by the Board, which are as follows: 50 cents per bushel for coffee pickers, and 81.60 per 8-hour workday for other workers. The hearing will take place at o! The hearing will take place in the Aponte Theater, beginning at half past nine in the morning, before the members of the Board, Mr. Lorenzo Fernandez and Mr. Lorenzo Fernandez.
members of the Board, Messrs. Lorenzo Fernández and Jesús M. Benítez, and its president, Mr. Cándido Oliveras. In its penultimate special session, the Legislature approved a bill that later became Law Number 30 of September 13, 1950, establishing a tax of five cents on the first sales of each pound of coffee. The tax will be used for the coffee rehabilitation fund. The same law provided that within sixty days of being in effect, the Minimum Wage Board shall establish a minimum wage (Continued on page 18, CoL 7).
Agriculture Wants to Create New Bank
Would Be For Aid To Farmers TA Requests $4,300,000 For Projects - Plans Study Series Requests By S. GALVEZ MATURANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer More than $10 million for the first year of the Eighth Economic Program has been requested by the Transportation Authority and the Department of Agriculture. The latter plans to provide facilities for the food marketing project in the metropolitan area. The Transportation Authority, according to Rafael Durand, head of the Finance and Economic Studies Division of the Planning Board, has requested $4,300,000 for the dredging of the canal, the construction of a seawall and the filling of 75 ropes for the facilities of the aforementioned project. The Department of Agriculture and Commerce has requested $7,500,000 to finance this project for wholesale food marketing facilities in the metropolitan area. The project in general was the subject of an intensive study by Mr. Ksrl Otten, an official of the Federal Department of Agriculture. Funds For Airports In the administrative hearings, the Transportation Authority has also requested $58,892 for operating expenses of the Port Captaincy, since this is a new activity assigned to the Authority within the Island Government's reform program, which in the past was covered by the funds assigned to the Department of the Interior. The TA is also requesting $1,500,000 for the continuation of the construction of the Isla Verde International Airport, which is being built with combined funds from the Federal and Island governments. New Agricultural Bank From the Department of Agriculture, in its presentation to the Finance and Economic Studies Division of the Planning Board, requests $2,000,000 for the creation of an agricultural credit and cooperative bank, to be started with a capital of two million dollars. It also requests $72,000 for the establishment of ten breeding centers as part of the livestock insemination plan. The Social Programs Administration is requesting an allocation of $200,000 to carry out a low-cost rural housing program under Title V of the Land Law, each unit of which has been estimated at a cost of $300. For its part, the Lands Authority is requesting an additional $300,000 to continue its program for the reclamation of swamp and arid lands. (Continued on Page 18, Col. 3) Telephone Company Improvements Reported By DARIO CARLO EL MUNDO Staff Writer Mr. José D. Domínguez, general manager of the P. R. Telephone Company, reported yesterday on the progress of the plans to carry out the first phase of the program to improve the service provided by the company. (Continued on Page 1Ñ, Col. 8)
Surgeon General to Visit Island
- Hk ■ S -. J ' " & <S . K9Lt jK z j&\ *% / Mbjra <i. JR ■ JM H -- ■ ÍI > m | B H ® 41.
The Surgeon General of the United States, Dr. Leonard Scheele (left), and the American millionaire, Mr. Goldblatt, who arrived on the island yesterday on business related to the American Society Against Cancer. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
Yesterday arrived in Puerto Rico from Santo Domingo, Dr. Leonard Scheele, Surgeon of the Federal Public Health Service, who headed the American delegation to the Pan American Sanitary Summit, held in Ciudad Trujillo, came to the island accompanied by billionaire Maurice Goldlatt, an official of the American Cancer Society.
Goldlatt, a University of Chicago official and businessman who has lately been concerned about health problems in the United States and other areas. . Yesterday, Dr. Guillermo Arbona accompanied the visitors to the University of Chicago Medical School (Continued on page 18 CoL 5).
North Koreans Are Undermining Coasts On Signs Of New Allied Invasions N * # - -
A Kilchu¿3 - Sea of 'Jopan Korea' NORTH Boy - f l/r\DC A - ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ - - - - - ---- " i £ Uiionabu A ' K' m P° Airfield , Inchon h k / on^sl v SOUTH KOREA ~ sT \.... _ ' ' > ' TATUTf MILES |
Konhr
€ t
K*53
Arrows point to Jongbu troop movements (C), near the $8 Parallel. Bomaureorean aviation within 1* Core* territory of the barded (symbols of explosions) the North (A) - along the eastern coast, and cere* nec between Wonzan and Hamhung, on October 5, from the center of the 1* peninsula" (B); and the thrust of 1* (Associated Press photo.) American Marines north of Ut-
Mayor Rincon Appeals His Case Superior Court Convicted Of Acts Charged By Minister. Judge Acquits Folch Reverend Andres Folch, Presbyterian minister, was acquitted by Judge Rafael Marchand of a crime of "slander" that was imputed to him by Mayor Manuel Garcia, of Rincon. The same magistrate condemned Mayor Garda, however, for the following crimes imputed to him by Reverend Folch: 1 - That last April 23 he and Mr. Tito Crespo infringed the Unnecessary Noise Law, at 8:00 at night. 2 -. That on April 26th last, at about 8:30 in the evening, they both "disturbed the peace, Interrupting the religious worship of the Pres(Contln'.a Church on p. 18 Col. 6)
Sawyer Hopes To Get Clear Picture Of Island Situation Says He Will "Many Will Attend Banquet Today; Doesn't Know If He Will Speak To Press
Shortly before 6:00 p.m., U.S. Commerce Secretary Charles H. Sawyer arrived in Puerto Rico yesterday. He arrived in a plane of the Civil Aeronautics Administration, accompanied by the head of that federal agency, "pñnr Donald W
auujiiyajiauu a uiuim urpt Nyrop; the Assistant to the Director of the Coast and Geodetic Service, Kar) B. Jeffers; the Chief of the Caribbean Bureau of International Trade, Albert J. Powers; the Assistant Chief of the Weather Bureau Service, Mr. Delbert M. Little, and other personalities. Luiz Muñoz Marin, the Speaker of the House, Ernesto Ramos Antoninl, the President of the Senate, Samuel R. Quiñones, the Governor's Military Aide, Alberto Arrlllaga and Mr. Teodoro Moscoso, Mr. Esteban Bird and Mr. Salvador V. Caro. When asked by reporters, Mr. Sawyer said that his trip is of good will and that he intends to visit Santo Domingo, Haiti and Cuba for the same purpose. When asked if he was coming to study the conditions of maritime and air transportation, he answered that "I will ask many questions and I hope to be well informed about things; then I will probably call a press conference, in agreement with Governor Muñoz Marin." Has Not Decided Speech He added that he came directly from Miami and intends to attend tonight a banquet given at the Banker's Club. Asked whether to speak to her there, he said he had not yet decided whether his remarks would be to the Press or not." \ Sawyer expressed his pleasure at being on a visit to 1* Island and said he hoped to take advantage of it to get a clear picture of nues(Contlnued on p. 18 Col. 6)'
urmcDciA nunor jjonaiQ w- " Rabies Case Confirmed Caguas City Positive Examination of the Head of the Dog that Bit 2 People A new case of rabies was registered last Wednesday in the town of Caguas, and was confirmed yesterday in the first examination of the Biological Laboratory of the Department of Health. This is the eighth confirmed case of rabies in Puerto Rico. The rabies case in Caguas occurred in the Troche neighborhood, in a two year old dog owned by Mr. Pablo Diaz. The dog became furious at once, attacking everyone. His first victim was the boy Antonio Diaz, ten years old, whom he bit. Later it also bit Marcelino Diaz, while it was tying him up. According to the report sent to the Department of Health by the Medical Officer of the Public Health Unit of Caguas, the dog tried to destroy everything in its path with its teeth. The report also indicates that the home of Mr. Pablo Diaz, owner of the dog, was being destroyed by the dog's (Continued on page 18, Col. 8)
Doctors and Dentists Under 50 Ordered to Register
By ROBERT BARKDOLL WASHINGTON, Oct. 6 (I.P.U.)-President Truman today ordered the draft registration of all doctors and dentists under 50 years of age. Meanwhile officials in charge of national mobilization were meeting behind closed doors to attack the growing manpower problem. Mr. Truman set Oct. 16 for the enrollment of some 4,450 doctors and dentists trained at government expense during World War II and who spent less than 21 months in military service. Doctors and dentists who earn their diplomas after Oct. 16 must* enroll on the day they graduate.
The day they graduate or within five days thereafter. On a subsequent date, but not later than January 16, all practicing physicians and dentists under 50 years of age, except those in reserve units, must register for the draft. The order applies to veterans as well as non-veterans. Meeting of Secretaries The manpower meeting was convened by the mobilization czar, W. Stuart Symington, to decide which manpower is being mobilized and to decide which troops are being mobilized.)
Another Allied Division Has Crossed the 38th Parallel. Await UN Orders For EARNEST HOBERECHT TOKYO, Aug. 6 (PU)- A land-based "U.S. division has crossed the 38th Parallel amid indications that the North Korean communists, under attack by land and air, also fear being rammed from a third side: that is, from the sea. U.S. naval forces reported that the waters off the east coast of Korea, from Changjon, 80 kilometers north, to Wonsan, are heavily mined. Members of the South Korean Corps of Engineers reported that some stretches of sandy beach are protected by land mines, laid by Jos. comu. nlists in anticipation of possible landings by United Nations forces. American warships yesterday destroyed three mines off the East Coast, bringing the total number of mines destroyed by the Allies so far to 68. One American minesweeper has already been sunk, and two American destroyers have been damaged by mines. Local observers believe that General Douglas MacArthur is only awaiting final orders from the United Nations to launch the offensive to destroy the Communist armies in Korea. Four Possibilities Such observers see four possibilities: (1) MacArthur may launch his troops across the 38th Parallel by road in the direction of the Communist capital of Pyongyang. (2) He can make landings on the west coast near Pyongyang. (3) It can do the same on the east coast near Wonsan. (4) It can make landings on both coasts at the same time. The South Korean Sixth joined the South Korean 6th and 3rd Divisions in the cross-border attacks. The Sixth penetrated at Chlchen-N!, five kilometers north of the Parallel, on the main road to Hwachon, and 96 kilometers inland from the east coast. Hwachon is the eastern foothold of the new line of defense which the communists are trying to organize. The South Korean Third on the other hand is only 50 kilometers as the crow flies and almost 65 kilometers by road southeast of Wonsan, a port on the eastern coast directly opposite Pyongyang, on the other side of the Korean peninsula. Tonight at 7:30 p.m., the Chief of Staff of the First South Korean Army Corps, Brigadier General Kim Chong, Kop. announced that the outposts of the Third Division were within three kilometers of Tongchon and had not yet encountered any resistance from the communists. Forces Withdrawing According to reports from reconnaissance plane pilots, the Reds were withdrawing forces from Wonsan. They added that communist columns were moving north and west of Wonsan. Others were moving south. The movement of communist troops to the south could be due to the purpose of offering resistance on the northern bank of the Namda River, located to the south of Wonsan. On the other hand, the movement of other North Korean forces to the north and west is intriguing. (Continued on page 18, Col. 7) Boricua Dies in Korean War Service The Department of the Army in San Juan announced yesterday another Puerto Rican casualty on the Korean war front. It is Private First Class Julio R. Rodrígus, a native of Caguaa, who was killed in action last September 1. He is the son of Mr. Etanlslao Rodrigues, a resident of Caguas. This brings the number of Puerto Rican casualties in the current Korean campaign to 48. So far, six compatriots* have lost their lives in war action on the Korean front, namely: Julio R. Rodrigues, of Caguae, the last reported casualty, and Private First Class Ramon Cruz, of Santurce; George L. Gonzalez, of Laree; Rosario Gerona, of Humacao; Amos de Jesus, of Uayey and First Lieutenant Elmy Matta, of Cayey. General Sibert, commander of the Army in Puerto Rico, and the Secretary of Defense, addressed messages of condolences to Mr. Etanlslao Rodrigues, for the loss of his son in Korea.