THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Medium cloudy with a few light showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, $6 degrees; low, 7" degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:M this afternoon, 30.04 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Feb. 24.(PU)In the afternoon today "a Reported the" following temperatures: New York, 48; Chicago, H; Washington, 88; Miami, 80. Predictions for tomorrow in New Ynrk and neighboring cities: a">clear and cold, with the highest temperature between !0 and 28.
tomorrow's^^^isé^tomorrow's
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXX
Entered as second cías" matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY FEBRUARY 25, 1950
NUMBER 13942 FIVE CENTAVOS
Fernós Speaks Before Security Agency
Calls For Expansion Of Social Security Says It Would Complement Government Program By PAUL HARRISON WASHINGTON, Feb. 24 - (PU) - Puerto Rican Resident Commissioner in Washington, Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern, yesterday proposed that Congress establish an operation he called "de cboperaclón" to add effectiveness to the island government's own aid program, dubbed "Operation Hands to Work". Fernós described Puerto Rico as "a model democracy" in the New World. Addressing the professional and administrative staff of the U.S. Social Security Agency, Fernos said that the extension of Social Security benefits to Puerto Rico, which is contemplated in a pending measure, should be part of that "operation". "In my opinion," he said, "there must be a complement to our Operation Let's Get to Work. I believe that Congress should adopt a policy that ends in a program that extends to Puerto Rico the federal laws that alleviate conditions, improve the situation and facilitate 'Operation Hands to Work'. I call the complement 'Operation Cooperation'." Fernós described in detail the history of Puerto Rico, its economy and society, emphasizing "qs reasons, to opine that social security benefits are essential to the "olyclon of jos economic problems. Welfare Program The Island Government's welfare program, Fernós said, is providing limited assistance to 57,813 needy persons, but faces the problem of meeting 70,000 additional applications. Maximum benefits, he said, currently stand at $7.50 a month. Under legislation "tested by the House, and now before the Senate, the public assistance and old-age retirement provisions would be extended to Puerto Rico. The currently pending legislation makes Puerto Rico eligible for nearly $3,000,000 annually in public assistance benefits. However, a Ways and Means subcommittee that recently visited the island has recommended amendments that would give Puerto Rico a total of $11,000,000. This would make it possible to insure average payments of $10 to $12 per month, per person. Political History Discussing Political History (Continued on PAg. 16-Col. 3) Ether Used In Mental Illness New Method Injects Substance Into Brain ALBANY, N.Y., Feb. 24 (PU)-Medical science today offered a "new and ¡romedious" treatment for persons suffering from certain types of mental illness. The unprecedented use of intravenous ether injections during experiments at "1 Nfanhattan State Hospital indicated that the treatment compares favorably with the electric "shock" method, the State Department of Mental Hygiene said. The experiments were conducted by three members of the State Institute of Psychiatry, the Department of Mental Hygiene Research Center and a member of the medical staff' of Manhattan State Hospital. Mental Hygiene Commissioner Frederick MacCurdy said the ether therapy method has never been used before. Ether is slowly injected into the patient's veins, employing a technique similar to that used in blood transfusions, MacCurdy said. The experiments indicated that the treatment is of particular help to people suffering from psychosis of the emotional and depressive type.
100 Torrefactors laid off in St. Juan Group
About 100 workers of the Yaucono and Rio roasting plants were laid off yesterday, according to a commission that visited EL MUNDO for this purpose. A group of 60 workers visited yesterday our editorial office to inform that both roasteries had notified them that until today, Saturday, they would be paid their salaries, and that they were suspended from their respective jobs until the 1st roasteries could acquire the coffee from the hands of the farmers. Thirty-six workers from the Yaucono roastery reported that they had been paid half a week's wages yesterday, while 24 from the Rio de Janeiro roastery reported that they had not yet received any.
ja reported that they had not yet received this week's wages, and that they had been informed that they were without work until the situation was clarified. They will visit Vlcém Mr. Manuel Soto, representing the Yaucono workers, and Mr. Victor Vlftales, of Café Rioja, informed EL MUNDO that they have visited representative Pedro Vega Berrtos to inform him of the situation, and that on Monday they will visit Mr. Antonio Vicéns Ríos, general administrator of Suministros, to the effect "that he make an effort to solve the situation.
Géigel Polanco at the Governor's Office - 'UHMS'' ■ ' W Mlj -j. £ %, 7? I Governor Luis Muñoz Marín talks with Attorney General Vicente Géigel Polanco shortly before he left for Washington on Thursday afternoon aboard the steamship Tuerto Rico. Géigel Tolnnco assumes the interim governorship, until Muñoz Marín's return. By law, the Attorney General is Lieutenant Governor of the Island. (Photo F.L MUNDO)
A bill by Representative Francisco Díaz Marchand amending the law on gambling halls liberalizes the terms of the law by establishing a scale for the payment of franchises according to the category of the municipalities. The liberalization extends to provide that gaming parlors may be established in different types of establishments, contrary to the limitations currently set forth in the Law. Section 3 of the bill provides for the amendment of Section 5 of Act 221 of May 15, 1948. Said Section 5 is hereby amended so as to read as follows: "The franchises issued under this Act shall be subject to the payment by the grantee to the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, in advance quarters, for franchise fees, the following annual "umak, not to be confused with what is established hereinafter: Category A-l, Annuity of $24,999; First Class Municipality; Category A-2, Annuity of $12,000; First Class; R-1, Annuity of $6,000; Second Class; R-2; Annuity of $3,000; Second and Third Classes, "Provided, that the above categories shall not deprive the Tourism Advisory Board or the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, when in a municipality of First, Second or Third Class, before or after the effective date of this Act, of the right to establish, in a municipality of First, Second or Third Class, any hotel, restaurant, amusement center or entertainment center in which a hotel, restaurant, amusement center or entertainment center is located, or in which a hotel, restaurant, amusement center or entertainment center is located. any hotel, restaurant, entertainment center, casino, private club or center, and any other entertainment center registered with the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico that requests the issuance of a franchise in accordance with the terms of this Act, the value of the building, area in which it is located, and volume of business, shall be taken into consideration as a factor to set a higher or lower category, at its discretion, without being subject, therefore, in either case, to the franchise fee established above. The establishment of categories by municipalities has a favorable atmosphere in the House of Representatives, as far as we have been able to learn, since it would give the opportunity to small municipalities in which there are establishments of the nature of those provided for in the law, to benefit from the income coming from gambling establishments. Lightning Session The House of Representatives met at 10:00 A.M. yesterday at 10:00 A.M. The House of Representatives met at 10:00 A.M. yesterday ha(Cqq. M. yesterday (Continued on page 16, Col. 8).
One Year In Jail For Child Neglect Judge Fernandez Revokes Suspended Sentences Of Two Convicted Fathers Two fathers convicted of having abandoned their children were sentenced yesterday to serve one year in jail each, the court revoking at the same time the suspended sentences previously imposed on the defendants. Judge Victoriano M. Fernandez, of the First Chamber of the San Juan Municipal Court, yesterday sentenced Felipe do Jesus Gonzalez and Angel Manuel Rios to serve one year in jail each for the proven crime of abandonment of minors. Previously, the Bahia court handed down a sentence condemning De Je. | The court previously sentenced De Je. to one year in jail and suspended his sentence if the defendant satisfied his spouse's alimony of sixty-five dollars. However, according to the order issued by the judge, the defendant, who accepted the suspended sentence condition, did not comply with the terms of the suspended sentence. The court ordered the defendant to be remanded to the San Juan district jail "so that he may comply with the terms of the suspended sentence, and the court ordered that he be remanded to the San Juan district jail "so that he may comply with the terms of the suspended sentence, and the court ordered that he be remanded to the San Juan district jail "so that he may comply with the terms of the suspended sentence. So néusó De Jesus do tenor in : complete calado do abandonment r his daughters RlnncA Iris and Rafaela de Jesus, do 16 and 15 years respectively. On the other hand, Angel Manuel Rios was previously sentenced to six months in jail, providing that his sentence would be suspended in case he satisfies an alimony quota of ten dollars per week (Continued on PAg. 16 - Col. 8).
English Government Confronts Crisis in the Face of Labour's Slim Majority
Court Orders Miners Union To Be Prosecuted Must Show Cause Why Not Punish It For Crime <lp Contempt By ROBERT E. LEE WASHINGTON, Feb. 24. (P. II.)-After rejecting claims that striking miners are rebelling against John L. Lewis, Federal Judge Ricnniond B. Keech today ordered the Miners' Union to appear Monday for trial to answer charges of criminal and civil contempt. Keech ruled that the Union must show cause why it should not be heavily fined for disobeying the Court's order to immediately suspend its strike, which is crippling the economy. The judge dismissed the union's claim that it had "purged" itself when Lewis twice ordered his 372,009 miners to end their strike. Lewis, who personally exonerated himself by the two ineffective orders to return to work, was not named as a defendant. This will be the third time in three years that the union will appear in court for defying anti-strike injunctions. In the (Continued on Page 16--Col. 4)
| teresada. > The discussion of this bill, ron ■ I e] number 38, was prolonged for more ■ than two hours, as Senators Celestino Iriarte, Víctor Gutiérrez Franqul, Luis A. Negrón López and Cruz Ortiz Stella engaged in a de- ■ ! hate on the procedures being followed by the different ro- ' mltés of the Senate when reporting bills for consideration before the Total Committee. During the discussion, Senator Triarte accused the Senate of not keeping minutes of the sessions in its committees, which caused a great commotion among the senators, who immediately produced before the Senate the books of the Finance, Instruction, Labor, Municipal Roads and Civil Law Committees, rejecting the accusations of Senator Iriarte. Legislative History However, the latter insisted that said minutes were poorly kept because they did not contain the "legislative history" of each bill; the reason for their approval and the need for their approval, as well as the "legislative history" of each bill, as well as the reasons for their approval.
III. I ■■■■ I - II.-. lilililí." I - - - - -- -- w" -- - - - II I . | Illi- -III--- mm ■ T- - ■ - - - I . II I 1 J,-JL- II - - - - - - - - - - - - - , - " Witness Claims First Shot Was from a Police Officer.
f MM ' "s£m| Em, In^ 7 । -H, Corporal Basilio Baerga, policeman José C. Alomar and lieutenant Enrique Maldonado, are pictured when they appeared before the Ponce District Court to hear the reading of the indictment of generic murder, formulated by the prosecutor's office. The defendants are accused of having shot Ul¡llano Famania Leandry to death on the afternoon of June 1, 1918, in the Calambreftae neighborhood of Santa LaBabei.
RONCE, February 24, (By Miguel Rivera, correspondent"- Today continued in the Ponce District Court the trial -.Igue El Pue. blo against the lieutenant rie "a Poli. । cía Insular. Enrique Malrionado; 31 j Corporal Basilio Baerga and GuardM ¡ José C. Alomar who -" les lm puta haber malario a Ulpiano En j nianin Leanriry en Santa Isabel, ei 18 rie julio rie 1948. At 8:00 a.m. last night the fourth and last witness for the prosecution, Eugenio Malrionario Ro "", testified that he was at his uncle's house when the events occurred. | He said that the first shot was fired by Corporal Baerga in front of a store a few meters from the victim's house. In summary, he reaffirmed the prosecutor's theory, except that he con. tradixed as to which of the defendants fired the first shot. It will be noted that the prosecutor maintained that the first shot was fired by Guar. day Alomar, after the countryman Mateo Negron called the parire riel Interfecto a pimp. The witness, cross-examined by Pierlulssl, declared that the first shot was fired by the guard Alomar, and that Corporal Baerga fired after being wounded with a machete in one hand. The detainee later presented the statement of the witness given before Lieutenant Ramon Muñoz, of Ponge. who conducted an administrative investigation after the "incident" occurred. In the lnter rt ". i I (Continued "n page 13, Col. 5).
- i -"'i n Ul K- ' J u r 1 British Prime Minister Clement Attlee waves his hat to his supporters as he returns from his last pre-election tour. His party won a close victory in Thursday's election, making it certain that '- ntlnn continues in office. Wlnaton Churchill, the Conservative leader, is shown here with his traditional cigar from a tour of the Lancashire area. Although the Conservative Party was defeated. it managed to increase <4 number of seats it has in Parliament. Churchill triumphed decisively in his district, to retake his seat as leader of the opposition in Parliament.
Churchill: Triarte Against Method Used i To Report Bills Approve Bill On Pay- Check Penlidna. Quiñones and Ramos Leave Tomorrow For Haiti Fair The Senate "tried "yer in third reading a bill, " the purposes of fixing in a nhn the maximum term for qu* the payers j of the Government could cash the amount of extrAviated checks, " ¡ upon presentation of sufficient evidence by porte de persona in- ।
| : Pons Denounces Poor Condition Of Pharmacies Cites Series Of Violations And Requests That Owners Comply With Laws The Commissioner of Health has addressed a communication to the owners" rie pharmacy" and drbguerla" ri* 1a Isln about the poor conditions in which numerous pharmacies" are found and about the violations that "e are being carried out rie Ir Law number 72, rie Food, Drugs and Cosmetic,". Drugs and Cosmetics", in Puerto Rico. In the above communication, which was addressed by Commissioner rie Snlud before he embarked for the United States" accompanying the Governor, the latter states that the "violations of the sanitary regulations" and of the above-mentioned law "oblige us to call your attention once more to them, and to demand from you the faithful observance of said law and regulations. Commissioner rie Sa- j luri is expressed in the sense rie that rie the violations to which:he refers, en- i tre others figure e] that are exposed to the vento for the piihlico produc- , chemical and pharmaceutical produc- , tos without i Fe riebiria labeling. Beben Rotu'nr Dr. Pons clarifies that the] senior salesman is obliged to label the ' container" or packages with the following information: Name and address of the pharmacy or responsible firm"; name of the product (no abbreviations); net content; percentage of alcohol if in- . ■ ri trare in its composition; and if e" । |, poisonous substance, it shall rotu- , t (Continued on Pg. 16-Col. 7)
Attlee Summons His Cabinet Overwhelmed by Eaten* Rejection of Nationalization Considered | By LYT.E WOAON LONDON, Feb. 24. - (PID - The Labour Government obtained a slim majority in yesterday's" general election, and with only a few constituencies" left to finish the poll, summoned "1 Ga- ¡ híñete to a special session, to । consider the problems posed" by the" result" of the" polls. These results have placed Prime Minister Clement Attle in a situation unparalleled in more than a century. Indeed, since 1847 no party has won such a small majority in a general election. The full results of the 625 constituencies into which the United Kingdom is divided were as follows: Labor, 314; Conservatives, 293; Liberals, R; other parties, 2. The majority in the House of Commons is 313 seats out of a total of 625. The majority in the House ri" Jos quefta which is equivalent to a rejection rie ; Labor plans to continue : ariolnnie with the socialization of the pal". Both parties - Labour v Conservative - forgot for a, । moment the pnlttcla, to reflect on the gravity of the situation. Attlee convened the Cabinet for a meeting at his official residence at 10 Downing Street tomorrow morning. Neither he nor any of his colleagues wished to make a statement. Earlier, Wington Churchill had said that as "onsMouencU riel rMulttd" d" ks election"", the new Parliament was in "a very ine". fable position". E) chairwoman of the Conservative Party's Committee Against the Conservative Party, Lord Woolton, said it was a "gtave situation". The present state of affairs is a striking contrast with the previous election of 1945, when Labour won an overwhelming victory, with a majority of nearly two hundred seats in the House of Commons, and defeated 31 leading Conservative figures, including several members of the Cabinet. After consulting with "his Cabinet, Attlee must decide whether he will continue to lead the Government, which has such a small majority - a majority that really puts him on a "tightrope," he said, that it could collapse at any time. Political observers agree that the government cannot last more than a few months, and that it would certainly not survive the preterm elections next spring. In a few weeks' time the House of Commons will have to de "pachar several financial matters of" importance. Financial Danger There is a danger that the financial mechanism of] evasion may be forced to cease to function for lack of funds if the] Government fails to secure a majority to push through the measures. People close to Attle" rtlj*ron that the latter is likely to consider it his duty to continue "ahead with the present Government for a certain period of time, until" p". it becomes advisable to hold another election. This will be discussed at tomorrow's meeting of the Cabinet A majority of 59 or 69 seats in the House of Commons is considered necessary for another election to be held. House of Commons, in order that *1 Government may succeed in "proving its" l*y project". Labour has been perplexed by the election result. In reality, their triumph was tantamount to a defeat, as the results indicate that the electorate has swung to the right, which has taken many seats away from Labour, which went to (Continued on p. 14. Col. 5).
Sol Descartes Explains Proposed Change in Taxation.
T" the opinion of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Mr. Sol Lui" De", carteg. that the island tax system will be gradually changed. to stimulate the "ctlvidnde" essential producers of the country, and to ensure sufficient income to sustain and expand the public" services". A "l said yesterday at a press conference, adding that the system would tax less the" production activities. but be of general application. The Treasurer's explanation, Descartes said, is in line with the rules outlined by Governor Muñoz Marin in his recent message to the Legislature. He explained that the tax exemption law for the
for new e|ndu "tria" sets a definite period to conclude, until 1962. but that "the government of Puerto Rico will fulfill all" the" commitment" for the period granted". The trend at this time is. According to him, "instead of extending the number of years" of exemption, or expanding the number of industries" that could be covered, he explained, "to establish a system that basically stimulates all industries equally. "That is, he said, that all contribute to the support rie it" services but in a way that does not interfere with their rapacity rie expansion." i On the other hand, it has been recommended 1 (Continued on p. 14 Col. 7)
Muñoz Sent Budget $88,792,519
General Expenses Up $1,076,611 However Total Is Less Than Actual, By $8,702,765,66 By .lunn Martinet Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO A budget amounting to $R8,. 702,519.77 for the expenses of the Government for the year 1950.1951, was re. amended by Governor Muñoz Marin to the Legislature, according to the special message which he signed an. teayer, moments before leaving for Washington, and which was received in the Legislature yesterday morning. The model budget submitted by the Governor represents a reduction of $8,702,765.66, compared to the total budget for the current fiscal year. In spite of the recommended reduction, the operating expenses, that is to say, ordinary and undispensable expenses, for next year, will be $1,076,611.81 over the amount budgeted for the current year. In the contributions for public companies, it is recommended that | A decrease of $5,714,600.62 is recommended in contributions for public enterprises. In the permanent improvement budgets, a reduction of $6,136,272.61 is recommended; in the indeterminate appropriations, the recommended reduction amounts to $14,009.88, and in the estimated Appropriations for Ripietory Impairments, an increase of $2,085,505.64 is recommended. By functional groups, the 1949.50 assumptions compared with those recommended for 195051 are as follows; Expenditure* By Group i Operating expenses ii. i. i, 1949. : 50: ;$74.158.402.52. I recommended lo pa. । ra 1950.51; $75,235,014 13, A minen. ■ to of $1,076,611.61. Contributions to i public corporations, 1949-50: $11,248,600.62. Recommended for 1950-51: $5,532,000. A rebate of $5,714,600.62. Permanent improvements, 1949-50: $10,488,272.61. Recommended for 1950-51: $4,350,000. A rebate of $6,136,272.61. Tours Allocations year i 194fk50: $1,514,009.68, Recomcnda-1 do for 1950.51; $3,585,505.64. A nu. amount of $2,071,495.96. In his budget message, the Governor reports that the estimated ingro.1 sor for the year 1950.51 is $88,854.111, which will cover the amended expenditure budget, and will also give the budget for the year June 30, 1951, $151,592. The public debt in these mn. amounts is $12,522,751. To meet this debt there are resources, amounting to $5,971,632 in redemption funds, leaving the actual debt of the Pueblo of P ¡crin Rico at only $6551,119. This debt is 6 9 percent of the presumed total general fund debt, and one percent of the total revenue of Puerto Rico's economy. --i n ! In his message, the Government re. I commending to the legislators that the tax rates should be re. The Governor recommends that the sum of $1,090,000 be appropriated to continue the program of land development and construction of buildings for industrial purposes; and the sum of $200,000 be appropriated to finance the river electrification program being carried out by the Water Resources Authority. Recommends further, jnn allocates. (Continued on Page 16- I