the Daily World TOMORROW
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: - Partly cloudy with scattered showers. Winds do moderate to fresh, with some frequency, from the east northwest. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 77 degrees; low, "7 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:10 o'clock this afternoon, $30.0$ in- ** inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Jan. í (PU). - The following temperatures were reported this afternoon: New York, M¡ Chicago, 2"; Wáshlngton, 70; Miami, 77. Predictions for* tomorrow ep New York and neighboring cities: cloudy and moderate msystorm with the highest temperature near 65.
THE FIRST AND ONLY DAILY IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE A.
YEAR XXX
NUMBER 13897
FIVE CENTS
Entered as second class matter, Post Office. San Juan. P. B,
Truman Signals Reduction In Investment
Believes Economic Prospects Bright For 1950 Target 61,000,000 Jobs In Nation By LÓW8~CA88EL8 WASHINGTON, "ñero 6 (PU)- President Truman today described as bright the economic outlook for 1950 and presented a five-year business expansion plan to raise national output to $300,000,000,000,000 annually. In 1949 national output amounted to $259,000,000,000,000. In a highly optimistic semiannual economic report to Congress, Mr. Truman said that "it is not fantastic" to expect an au. ment in national progress which, by 1955. could add $1,000 to Ida annual income of the average family. "He added, however, that the Immediate task is to complete the recovery from last summer's slump, and to this end he set a target of 61,000,000 jobs for this year. A- lengthy Report of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, which accompanied the message to Congress, predicts a time of .prosperity, at least in the prl. mer half of 1950, but warns that another "moderate" downturn is possible in the latter part of next year. Mr. Truman underscored an appeal to the American people to look "confidently" to the future and make new investments by announcing that his tax proposals, to be submitted to Congress, will be aimed at "encouraging industrial activity." The President did not explain how his economic message reconciles with au request for a "moderate" increase in contributions this year. But his congressional leaders are talking about possible reductions in wartime excise taxes, which would be cancelled out by higher taxes on corporations and people in the upper wage brackets. Calls for Credit Control Although his six thousand word message was surprisingly free of warnings against depression and inflation, Mr. Truman cautioned that some government controls are still necessary. Stating, for example, that installment purchases have reached an all-time high and are still rising, Truman pl. gave Congress to restore credit control powers to the Federal Reserve Board. These powers expired last year. He has also requested that the Board be vested with greater authority over the reserves, including for the first time all horcos covered by the Corpo. The Board has also requested that the Board be vested with greater authority over the henearl reserves, including for the first time all horcos covered by the Federal Reserve Insurance Corporation. Another control requested by Truman was the extension of rent controls for another year, and authority to govern speculation in the grain markets. Asserting that the Nation has "rapidly regained its stability" after last summer's brief reduction, President Truman said additional steps must be taken to complete the recovery process." He called for "unity"-n all groups-employers, laborers, and farmers-and recommended that industry reduce prices wherever possible to create new markets and stimu(Continued on Ja page 12, Col, 2)
Message Points to Island Concern President Asked for Credit Control and Instructional Aid By Paul HARRISON WASHINGTON, Jan. 6 (FU) - President Truman's economic message to Congress today made no specific mention of territorial problems. But Insular observers in Washington took special note of several points. Since most of the food and manufactured goods consumed by Puerto Rico, for example, come from the mainland, the question of prices is very important. The President found that "in general, prices now appear to be at or near a stable level, consistent with the continued expansion of commercial activity. Thus, while the Administration may not be able to control the overall price structure, one element of the policy it is trying to implement is to maintain prices at present levels. Farm income was down 15 percent in 1949, compared with 1948. And now, the President said, farm prices are 23 percent below the postwar peak and 12 percent lower than a year ago. But at the same time, consumer, or retail, prices are only three percent below the postwar peak and two percent lower than a year ago. In other words, in general, consumers have not benefited much from the price declines. (Continued on page 12, Col. 7) Times Square Robber Shot Dead by Police as He Flees Amid Cars and Crowds NEW YORK, Jan. 8 (PU)Times Square regulars were left frozen in terror last night when an accurate, high-ranking traffic officer critically wounded a bandit in the center of the brightly lighted Broadway theater district. The bandit fell critically wounded, with a bullet in his neck, only a few steps from the gaudy marquee of the Paramount theater, which bore the title of the film it was showing - Battleground. The version of a Hollywood melodrama occurred as twenty-four-year-old Donald Gallant, a native of Rochelle, New Jersey, zigzagged between cars on Broadway in an effort to escape the police, who pursued him after an unsuccessful robbery at a tavern. Officer Reuben Van Arsdell knelt down and fired three shots. The third bullet wounded Gallant, oulen scratched in the very center of Times Square, at 45th Street, The Holdup " Police said Gallant had entered a tavern a few minutes earlier, attempting to hold up night manager Jesse Jaffe at gunpoint. A curious onlooker observed the holdup from the street and called Officer Wilbert Robert, son. (Continued on page 12, Col. 4)
From the Kings Cast at the Sixto Escobar Park
i® ■ h XL jR| fe . . R -
B -'-"IB ir' Efe 4 ' 1 fÍÉ- i j RB on "** RRRRRRRRRmRRIRRRRRRRRRRRRHRRWrfe IB 1
The engravings show various aspects of the distribution of Juguetea and other gifts carried out yesterday on Three Kings Day in the Sixto Esrobar Park, as an activity of the Government of the Capital. In the first engraving, nurses Rosa Maria Rodrigues and Maria Luisa Tous, from the Hospital of the Capital, practice the healing of a minor injury
received by 1a nlfllta Litu Lux Serrano after a fall she suffered while distributing toys. The greedy hands of mothers and children are shown in the second photo in the greedy search for the contents of the packages received. The children do not miss the opportunity to savor the goodies that were offered to them. The tor- * s
b -IrbbbHÍ HBBBBBBBBBBBBBi fe-' '"fe TfR J ■" "M pr ' Ate. 4 Rr . a A ' i, - ... | .. i ¡||'l 3 R
cer engraving shows an aspect of the distribution, in which the Administrator of the Capital, Felisa Rincón de Gautier, assisted by officials and employees of the City Hall, takes Motiva delivery. In the last photo, a father helps his son inflate a rubber balloon that came in his gift package, while the boy watches his I a
B¿ '■ ' W X ; BEmBBm B : t HH' s*
parent who makes a spiritual throwback to the early aflea of "u childhood. The Government of the Capital made the delivery of some 36,060 packages containing toys and candy and gave away refreshments and candy to as many children and their parents residing in the Capital and its neighborhoods. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JANUARY 7, 1950
Island Likely to Enjoy More Homes
Toys Given to Twenty Thousand Children at Escobar Park
Two children from Guaynabo have fun with the toys distributed yesterday, Three Kings Day, at the town's mayor's office. The
2,000 Enumerators To Be Used For Census Claim It Is Not Timely To File Petition Now To Get Job By Rurico E. Rivera Editor ■of EL MUNDO Horacio M. Royo, special supervisor of the 1950 decennial census in Puerto Rico, said yesterday that the filing of applications for census work is still not timely and should be discontinued. He said the Census Bureau "sympathizes with and appreciates the efforts of all those who daily offer their cooperation and services to work on the census. He added, however, that "it is evident that it is necessary to suggest that private citizens, as well as private or public employment agencies, postpone their activities aimed at soliciting jobs until the census work program in Puerto Rico reaches a level of development that justifies the timely filing of employment applications. Dljd date to be announced later by Census Bureau spokesman, that "the date (Continued on page 12, Col. 4) Air Force Experts Conduct Study SAN LÜIs7eñerTiC-(PU)-Two expert Air Force meteorologists said today that within a few years it will be possible to predict the approach of cyclones in a specified area. Maj. Ernest J. Fawbush and Capt. Robert C. Miller, stationed at Tinker Air Force Base, Oklahoma, made the prediction before the American Meteorological Society meeting here. They said that two years of research and study of cyclonic patterns have convinced them that it won't be long before experts on tlempa conditions can look at their instruments, pick a spot on the map and predict whether a tornado will strike that vicinity. (Continued on page 20 Col. 5)
The little truck with the name "You and Me" is Jusn Hernandez, who is "lente fells with the gift he received and in his in- fantile Imagination seems to harbor hope that he will be able to find a way out of this situation.
He seems to hope that someday he will become the head of a large transportation company. (Photo EL MUNDO)
The Government of San Juan also gave away Pitos, Maracas, Sweets Act in the Park was ordered in spite of the crowd gathered there. Airport Distribution
Around twenty thousand children of all ages received gifts from Royes, in the distribution carried out yesterday at the Sixto Escobar Park, as an activity of the Government of the Capital. Most of the children were accompanied by their parents and other relatives, who also participated in the distribution.
The majority of the children were accompanied by their parents and other relatives, who also partook of the gifts offered to the enormous concurrence that invaded the park. The distribution, which was carried out in an orderly manner despite the violent uproar caused by the crowd, consisted of 20,000 packages containing toys, 10,000 packages containing maracas, whistles, candy and other goodies; and the distribution of sandwiches, snacks and soft drinks. The event culminated with the raffle of about 200 valuable toys, among which were eight bicycles, 2 pedal cars, 6 dolls, 2 bicycles, 2 pedal cars, 6 dolls, 2 bicycles and 2 bicycles. 2 pedal cars, 6 large dolls, an electric train, 3 large plsicorre style guagüitas, 3 double wave radios, and 140 velocipedes and scooters of various sizes. These toys were specially donated by different commercial firms from San Juan and Santurce. The rest of the toys that were the object of the distribution represented the product obtained by the caravans that toured the establishments of the Capital and its neighborhoods, achieving the contribution of the commerce to the purposes of the campaign. M, of Sk 6 began the transportation of toys and other gifts from the City Hall building to the Sixto Escobar Park. The packages contained toys that, according to their value, varied in number from one to four toys, and were duly classified in order to identify those for boys and those for girls. Very early in the morning a considerable crowd had already accumulated in front of the Park, giving them access to the interior at 8:00 A.M., at which time they started to gather. M., hour in which the distribution began under the direction of the Administrator of the Capital, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier. The Administrator of the Capital was assisted in her work by Mrs. Clara Luz Vlzcarrondo de Quiñones, president of the Toy Collection Committee; Miss Josefina Marrero, Secretary of the Capital; the treasurer José Rodríguez Olmo: and the Administrative Assistant, J. 'Barbosa Aquino. They also took part in the (Continued on page 12, Col. 5)
Fonfrías To Make Action On Cataño Beach To File Bill Allocating Funds To Avoid Erosion The Department of the Interior has made a study of erosion on Palo Seco Beach, which it has forwarded to Senator Ernesto Juan Fonfrías, who intends to file legislation allocating funds to correct its effects. The means recommended by the Department to protect said beach have been outlined in the aforementioned Report, and are: (a) Construction of walls, seawalls or revetments along the shore. (b) Artificial filling of the beaches, with periodic replacement of the lost material. (c) Construction of impermeable breakwaters to retard erosion. The report includes the study made for the beaches of Luquillo, Puntn Las Marias, Bay View, Palo Seco and Arecibo. The engineers of the Department of the Interior consider that of these three solutions, the first is the one considered most practical for Palo Seco, using a stone revetment, since it is the most economical. Economic Protection This type of protection is recommended for its combined economy and effectiveness, and consists of revetment of the beach with three layers of stone of varying sizes placed at a convenient slope up to a height of six feet above mean tide level. In view of the current threat to the section of the beach in front of the Bay View Development, and due to the damage caused in Palo Seco this year by the sea, the arbor (Continued on page 12, Col. 6)
Would Be For Moderate Income Group Project Was Approved By Federal House. Senate Considers It By William nORVn.LIER Corres ponasí do EL MUNDO en Wáshlngton WASHINGTON, Jan. 6 , (Special to EL MUNDO)-The national public housing program, which provides funds for 30,000 low-income units for Puerto Rico over a six-year construction period, will probably be increased to meet the needs of those with higher incomes on the island. President Truman has 'asked the majority leaders in Congress to pass legislation, providing homes for sale and rent to middle-income groups - those averaging $2,000 to $4,500 a year - Puerto Rico will be included in this legislation, as it is in the low-income housing program, which is already in place. A bill already passed by the House is now being considered by the Senate Banking Committee and is believed to have a good measure in the Senate. It is believed that it has a good chance of being approved in Congress, since there is no subsidy involved in the proposed legislation. It is understood that the home program the President has in mind would provide government guarantees of private loans for a cooperative housing program. In addition to providing homes for people with incomes of $2,000 to $4,500 in Puerto Rico, this bill, if approved, would intensify the already active construction industry on the island, provide jobs and put more money into circulation. The Senate Banking Committee expects to open public hearings within a week. Administrative Assistant The appointment of Mr. Orville Watkins by Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós Tsern as Administrative Assistant puts the Resident Commissioner's office on a par with that of his colleagues in the House. Almost all members have filled the position in their staffs, and have found these assistants invaluable in lightening the burden on their shoulders. In the case of Dr. Fernós, his new assistant may be doubly valuable, because of his legal training and experience in drafting and analyzing legislation. (Continued on page 12. Col. 1) Health To Resume BCG Plan Monday - - - - - - - ... w | Vaccination To Continue In Five Districts Vaccination with BCG will continue to be carried out by the Health Department in the public schools, when classes begin,' next Monday, the ninth of the current school year. The vaccination will continue to be carried out in the five districts previously designated, that is, San Juan, Arecibo, Caguas, Ponce and Mayagüez. The vaccination in the schools of Rio Piedras will take place on January 17, at the Vilá Mayo and López Sicardó de Quintana schools. 3,000 to be Vaccinated According to a recent report by Health Commissioner Juan A. Pons, during the fiscal year the vaccination of school children will be completed, of which there are 3,000 (Continued on Page 12 - Col. 8).
Justice Announces New 1 Prisons And Penal Reform
SCHOOL PAGE TO RESUME MONDAY In our next Monday edition we will resume publication of the School Page, with material supplied by the Department of Instruction. In Monday's and Tuesday's pages our school readers <i. will focus Abundant information in connection with the feast of Kings and with *1 anniversary of the patrician Eugenio Maria de Mostos, which "a celebrates on the 11th. EL MUNDO is pleased to continue cooperating, in this way, to the work of educating Puerto Rican children. The material we publish is especially chosen for secondary school children, from sixth grade onwards, and also provides interesting reading for adult readers. - Barbey Action Saved Little Girl From St. Thomas Authorized Plane Flight To Bring Her To Island After Accident A quick action taken by Admiral Daniel E. Barbey, chief of the Tenth Naval District, made it possible for a four-year-old St. Thomas resident to be saved from almost certain death. On Three Kings Day, little Lucia Thomas was involved in an automobile accident which resulted in fractured legs, hips and backbone and other internal injuries. Carlota Amalia, where the accident occurred, does not have adequate facilities to perform the complicated surgery necessary in the case. Acting Governor Morris F. De Castro, acting Governor of the Virgin Islands, urgently requested Admiral Barbey to help Je by placing at his disposal a Navy plane in which to transport the girl to San Juan. The Admiral immediately authorized the flight and ordered two Navy pilots, Lieutenant Commander John B. Wayne and Lieutenant Ira A. Francis, to take charge of the child. Francis, to take charge of the rescue effort. They left with some auxiliaries in the R4D plane, and returned at 11:00 a.m. with the girl, accompanied by nurse Berecla Malone. The ambulance from the Naval Station took the little girl, in "egulda, to the Pavia hospital of Dr. Manuel Pavia Fernandez, where she was treated as promptly as the case required. Lucia woke up yesterday morning wrapped in plaster. "Yesterday's Three Kings Day may not have been the happiest of her life," says a Navy note, "but thanks to medical science and the men of the Aviation, she will be able to enjoy a normal childhood." Governor Morris DeCastro addressed a communication to Admiral Barbey yesterday, to express his personal gratitude and that of (Continued on page 12, Col. 1)
The Idea Is To Relieve Current Congestion Géigel Adds Also To Review Code Of Prisoners In Summary By BENJAMIN SANTANA j EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Attorney General, llcrircladft Vicente Géigel Polanco, *--< proposed to amend the penale nt rules governing the t the detainees in Summary. -■ '1 He informed also, that the De* partapiento de Justicia has under, eatüdio several plans to initiate this 'year the decongestion of the Insular prisons, He qualified as "very serious" 1a current situad - clon in the Penitenciarla! where the penal population is already around 2,300 inmates, cuandd the capacity is for no more than a thousand. The Chief of Justice intends to launch this year the reform of the penitentiary system, with emphasis on the social and moral rehabilitation of each of the inmates in the prisons. One of his plans will consist in simplifying classification procedures, so as to give many of the inmates the opportunity to demonstrate to society that they can live in society. The Attorney General omitted to point out that there are many inmates in the Prealdio and in the district canf celea who are already prepared for a normal life, without risk or danger to the community at large. When a person allegedly responsible for a crime is unable to provide the bail required to remain on probation, he is detained in Syrnarla. This means that he is temporarily imprisoned in a certain number of cells, different from that of convicts (where he remains until the day of his trial in court arrives, or as long as it is possible for him to pay the bail set for him). In the regulations governing the penal lot there are certain provisions concerning the conduct which such persons must observe in Suma ria. and the treatment to which they are entitled, and by such provisions they are allowed to dress as they are accustomed to do in civil life, and to receive food from outside, besides other articles for their personal use. Nor do they have to work, as other inmates do, and their wages are better than those of convicts. Nevertheless, the detainees in Su-' maria must be subject to all the other rules governing the penal institution, including those relating to visits from family and friends. A few days ago the Attorney General caught Mrs. Paulina Diaz talking with Miguel A. Falou, at about noon, in front of the Mayor's office, in the Sm Juan District Jail. Since then, the Attorney General has been considering several amendments to the penal regulations, one of which is to prohibit inmates in Sumarla from receiving meals from outside, Simplify Classification The Chief Justice believes that prison classification procedures can and should be simplified. He says this reform will allow the decongestion of Puer's overcrowded penal institutions (Continued on page 12. Col. 8).