THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly cloudy with isolated showers, becoming cloudy with showers and thundershowers in the evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 88 degrees; low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 1904 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Aug. 1L (FU). - At noon today m reported the following* temperst*: New York, 88: Chicar", 79; Wáshlngton. 87; Miami, 87. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: clear and pleasant, with the highest temperature between 75 and 80.
TOMORROW'S DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY AUGUST 12, 1950
NUMBER 14108
FIVE CENTS
ANNUAL XXXI
Entered aa second ciaos matter. Post Office, San Juan. P. E
E. U. RETIRES POHANG AIRPORT To Recall to Active Duty 296th N. G. Regiment,
Generals Conference South Korea
ü . h ;T/ JhHB B* x ' ■ - '3H MK. ; ■to ' The venera! Walton K. Walker (right) commander of the Eighth Army, conference with General William Kean, commander of the Fifteenth Division and of the offensive action against the Communists on the South Korean front, The conference was held at the latter's headquarters. (Associated Press photo.) Negotiations On Island Surplus To Be Next Week.
U.S. and Cuba Expect to Finalize Deal on 600,000 Tons of Sugar Purchase By James F. Cunningham WASHINGTON, Aug. 11 (FU). - U.S. and Cuban government negotiators expected to finalize this week the final details of the purchase of 600,000 tons of Cuban sugar by the U.S. government.
The two governments announced last week that they had agreed on a price of SM8 quintal. Forum Dr. Arturo Manas, secretary of the Cuban Sugar Growers Association, and officials of the U.S. Department of Agriculture have been working all week on other terms of the sale. Puerto Rico surplus. U.S. officials said they would not resume negotiations on surplus sugar from Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and Hawaii until the Cuban transactions were completed. The three territories have about 250,000 tons more than their 1950 quotas allow them to sell on the mainland. . Negotiations on their surplus, which would give the United States a total reserve of 850,000 tons of sugar, are expected to begin next week. Meanwhile, Government officials report that housewives and small industrial consumers as far east as Michigan and Ohio have slowed down the hoarding which began in connection with the hostilities in Korea. But on the East Coast, and especially in large cities like New York, said overbuying of sugar continues. Commercial Spheres Report (Continued on Page 14-Col. 7)
9,444 Officers Warned - { Air Force Reserve Also Requests 50,000 Reservists. Medical Personnel Urged By Dayton MOORE WASHINGTON, Aug. 11 (PU>- The Army today ordered 9,444 unorganized reserve officers to report for active duty in its first call-up of such reservists since war broke out in Korea. The Air Force announced it is calling up 50,000 reservists, including 42,000 soldiers with critically needed skills. The Army ordered 1,808 capital and 6,054 lieutenants of its reservists to report for active duty "with or without their consent'' for a period of 21 months or more, if not relieved. At the same time, it called up 1,582 medical officers, dentists, veterinarians and reserve medical officers of the rank of major and lieutenant colonel. Ambaa calls(Contlnúa en la Fág. 14-Col. 4)
Muñoz Says PEG Will Continue To Operate Accedes To Legislators' Request Senate Requests Study Of Wages In Island's Coffee Zone By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO / The House of Representatives yesterday approved Reorganization Plan Number 14, which refers to the Emergency Island Council. It also agreed to suspend its participation in the investigation initiated by the Senate, related to the island police, and that the latter body was suspended. At eleven o'clock in the morning, the House met, and the Senate sent bills P, S. 2, 4, 8, and 11, being referred to the Reorganization and Municipal Affairs Committees. Several communications were read, among them one from Mr. Eplfanlo Flz Jiménez, on behalf of the Puerto Rican Consumers Association, requesting legislation to solve the coffee shortage problem. Mr. Benjamin Ortlz then made a motion that the House cease its participation in the Police investigation, which was initiated by the Senate and joined by the House Police Committee. Among other things, Mr. Ortlz reported that the Senate had agreed to transfer the case file to the Governor, in view of the fact that he was conducting a similar investigation, thus suspending the inquiry which he had initiated, and which the House had joined. His motion that the House desist from continuing to participate in the Inquiry, thus respecting the will of the Senate, which began the same, was approved, Reorganization Plan Mr. Ortlz further moved that Reorganization Plan No. 14 be discharged by the Special Committee studying it, and to which he was referred the day before yesterday when opposition to it arose from some Representatives. The Plan abolished the Emergency Island Council and transferred its functions to the Governor. The opposition of the House was based mainly on the fear that upon approval of the plan, the Governor would delegate the administration of the PEG to the Commissioner of the Interior. There appeared to be no opposition to the Governor executing the provisions of the plan, only to the delegation. A similar plan, transferring ol PEG to the Department of the Interior was rejected by the Legislature in the last regular session. Fighting the plan, in Thursday's session, Rep. Carmelo Avila Medina declared that "as to this specific plan on which (Continued on Page 14-Col. 6)
Wounded in Korea
JOE FONT Joe E. Font Is Ninth Casualty Among Boricuas Injuries Are Not Serious, He Is In Tokyo Hospital Puerto Rican Joe A. Font, a lieutenant in the American forces fighting in Korea, was wounded in action on August 3. According to information supplied by military officials, the injuries sustained by Lieutenant Font are not serious. Lieutenant Font has been transferred to a military hospital in Tokyo, where he is being held. With Lieutenant Font, who is the son of Colonel William A. Font and Mrs. Fanny Lajera, residents of 1,222 Lucnetti Street, Santurce, are new Puerto Rican casualties in the Korean War. According to Colonel Font of the U.S. Army Reserve, Lieutenant Font is 23 years old and a civil engineer, graduated from Clemson University in South Carolina. - The Governor, Mr. Lula Muñoz Marín, yesterday issued a proclamation deposing the second extension of the call for a special session of the Legislature. Among the additional matters submitted by the Governor are the amendment of the Supply Law, the law organizing the Bar Association and the law fixing the basic price of caté. The Supply Law will be amended so as to impose penalties for illegal practices and prices. The call for a special session - now extended for the second time - was issued on 4 (Continued on page 14.-Col. 5).
Should Be Ready On September 12 Battalion 162nd Not To Be Mobilized Gallantry Ceremony In Salinas Yesterday SALINAS, Aug. 11 (By Migue! Rivera, correspondent) - The 296th Regiment of Puerto Rico will be mobilized for active duty on September 12, according to a Wáshlngton aerogram received by General Luis Raúl Esteves. This is the second time in the last 10 years that a unit of the Puerto Rico National Guard has been called to active duty. The first was on October 15, 1940. This call-up, however, is partial, since it did not include the 162nd Artillery Battalion and other units. The men of the 296th Regiment, commanded by Colonel Cesar A. Cordero, who have been called to active service, have 30 days to settle their personal affairs, The announcement of the mobilization was made during the ceremonies held at Camp Salinas, to present a combat pennant to the 162nd Artillery Battalion. The pennant and several medals were presented by Governor Luis Muñoz Msrln, who attended with his wife. National Guard Alert The Department of Defense aerogram on Wáohlngton, alerting the 296th Infantry Regiment, was received in San Juan and immediately transmitted by telephone to General Estoves in Salinas. He said it was "a great honor to the United States and Puerto Rico that one of our regiments had been called into federal service, by the President, in advance of the Continent. He added that the Puerto Rican military organization called to active duty "will continue under the very efficient command of Col. Cesar *A. Cordero and will establish a magnificent record of efficiency in the Federal Service. The 296th would have left tomorrow for Camp Tortuguero for maneuvers, but will no longer do so. The Field Artillery will go to Salinas, and the Army and Engineering units will leave this week for Tortuguero. Governor Muñoz Marin was also officially notified of the order. The Governor arrived at the Camp at 2:00 in the afternoon, accompanied by his wife, and proceeded to inspect the facilities of the military center. He then reviewed the 162nd Field Artillery Battalion commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Salvador Torróo, to whom he presented the Gallar (continued on page 14, Col. 5).
The last group of 100 conscripts from the original quota of 800, called up by the Selective Service Office in Puerto Rico, will be served today at Fort Buchanan, and will be on their way home later today. This group went to the Recruiting Center yesterday morning, where they underwent physical and mental examinations after completing the other requirements. Under a new system, Individuals called to the Recruiting Center at Fort Buchanan are required to stay overnight at the camp until the next day when their cases will be fully processed. In the afternoon, they may use the facilities of the military canteens and in the evening they may attend f l (Continued on page 6, Col. 3).
- SOUTH e viJiX V* Té WoogwarJf Anqon9 ru>it ?2síí 9 TA E G U V Chanpnyong < A \ , ■dxStmnanqiin '- rn ™A ' t ,VW \ DffPfsr afoT'íM; Vqf J*' @ ® 9 statuti milis 50.
I4W black arrows indicate the Red advance on the east coast, where, according to the latest reports, they captured the city of Fohang and were approaching the airport. The open arrows indicate the position occupied by the South Korean defenders on August 10. The shaded areas indicate the territory captured by the Americans in the Chlnju sector. The American patrols were within two miles of that town. Along the Naktong River, American and South Korean troops have contained or cut off North Korean forces establishing bridgeheads to the northwest and southwest of Tsegú. (Associated Press photo).
Teachers Are Granted Extension for Payment of Extramural Studies at the UPR By Benjamín Santana Staff Writer EL MUNDO Teachers began to receive their checks for the month of July, following efforts* made by the Puerto Rico Teachers Association, according to Executive Secretary José Joaquín Rivera, who added that teachers will have a one-month extension to pay their tuition" for extramural studies at the University. Meanwhile, efforts are being made so that the Scholarship Council will meet as soon as possible and grant the scholarships * to the teachers who are studying on the island. According to a note authorized by the Department of Inatrucclon, in (Continued on' Page 14-Coi. 8)
Air Force Has Joined Defense Threat To Sector Is Serious In South, Marine Corps Is Two Miles Off Chinju By FRAÑíFtREMATNB TOKYO, Saturday, August 12. - (PU) - Members of the U.S. Air Force joined the infantry today in a last-line "stand-off" at the vital Pohang air base on the southeast coast of Korea, which is already under sniper fire. U.S. Air Force men and colored infantry troops formed a line of defense around the airport. Backed by tanks and artillery, they awaited a full-scale attack by the North Koreans and were ready for a fierce battle. The town of Fohang, 62 miles north of the Allied supply port of Poaan, and 62 miles north of the airport, fell into the hands of the North Koreans. Enemy snipers* were within a mile of the airport runway, the best the United Nations forces could hold on their small beachhead in Korea. Enemy batteries were shelling the Allied lines from emplacements half a mile behind the snipers. Surrounding the field Dominating the mountain positions, Communist infantry and guerrillas surrounded the airfield. Allied reinforcements, moving from Pusan, had to weigh through enemy fire. It was admitted as sorts Is new threat against the United Nations forces. About 3,000 North Korean infantrymen and guerrillas were on the attack against Pohang airport. But it was reported that another ?,000 were in the mountains around the airport. IF the enemy hoped, in addition to capturing the airfield, to attack from the south against Pu" sán or westward against Tasgú, on the western front, it remained to be seen, The headquarters of Gen! MacArthur headquarters here! It was indicated that these enemy troops, including a tank regiment, might attempt to cross the river en masse and seize Taegú, only eight miles east of the nearest crossing point. On the southern front, American troops of the 3rd Infantry Regiment, the northern tip of the Keen triple combat operation, formed an eight-mile front along the Nam River.
Marine Soldiers in Action in Korea.
''■-'* r ' '*'"* * * r '- *' '' '' '' .' *'/ "' ,,z -.z -.*- *- *' '' ; *'*- ¿ r - / '' '' '' ¿ ™ . SR Jits' >*'Vv<'- w- 4B" -iJr? ■■ Vkí? ii.y$* ;V '$ * *- Uf HM ISKL i HnSBk I ' - * M, & %£MBSr ' ■fipHSRI IbHOMf' bM K/ ' 'Em ' W Emm ' B v^MBMl í<<> ~ v ( <1MF 3-,- ,r * i W ll WMiMlBi'C ¥ *"■< L 4WMBy h. -*'"*m] RRÉl ■* m i s 1 wBS -.j -■ aMM -v ■ " Xt.OLi i* Í* Í* ■ *; ' I , WB.
- ' - 5 ■ / * American crews* of a bazooka and a machine gun prepare to give the enemy a warm welcome from their positions on a hill overlooking the plain at an unidentified site in Korea. Lance Corporal (in front of the "Amara")
Billy Weatherly, of Greenville, Texas, manipulates the machine gun, which was brought to him by Corporal Leen Rothreb. of RiloyvlUe, Virginia, to feed it with bullets. Lance Cpl. Richard Wallach (laqtilerda), of St. Cloud, Mtaaoota, prepares to place the projectile in the bullet.
projectile in I* bazooka quo "o operated by first lieutenant Wilfred Dias, of Fluahlng, N.Y. (N. of the R.-Infanta Dias can wr Puerto Rican. He hails from Floehlng, a district where even Boriouas reside). On the right we go to i"
Marine Lieutenant First Class Samuel Rampell, of Bridgeport, Conn. Connecticut, cleaning his rifle, is my partner Jamea Fennell, of Long Island City. New York and Minneapolis, preparing individual trenches (Photo P. A.).