the World _ .
1 1 1 WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Medium cloudy to cloudy with scattered showers during the day and at night. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY i - Maximum temperature, 88 degrees; minimum. 75 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.85 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Nov. 2. CPU),- The following temperaturs" were reported this afternoon: New York, 60; Chicago, 46; Wáshlngton, 75; Miami, 82. Forecasts for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities*:" mostly cloudy and cool with light rain. Tai highest temperature between 50 and 55.
DIARIO DE la MASARA THE FIRST NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC CERTIFIED CIRCULATION
iÑO XXXI
Entered ss second claco matter, Post Office, San Juan, P..R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1950
OF 1950
NUMBER 14191 FIVE CENTAVOS
Albizu Campos Likely To Be Indicted Along With Oscar Collazo
m n * fl ■ ■' >- < ■ - .
In the fntn of the, Isqulcrdit appears Mrs. Rosa Collasn, while being escorted to the Women's Prison, in New York, on the first day" of the current month, by" detective", de "puéa of having aldo arrested, and fljáraele a fiante of 50,000, accused of conspiring in the assassination attempt against President Harry S, Truman. The aenora Collaso in the Xaa of one of Ida don man" who tried to aaealnar the Pro ite in Wánhlngtnn one day. On the right. Otear Collaao ae shows Impassive in cata photo that was taken on the morning of the
Thursday morning as he lay in the Emergency Hospital in Wáahingtnn, where he was expected to recover after being wounded at the Caaa Blair's eacalera the day before. Collazo, 87, a New York resident, and another Puerto Rican revolutionary, tried to enter to meet President Truman. One poGeía died after the shooting duel," and Coll""o is charged with murder. (Associated Press photo).
Police And National Guard Patrols Intensified Raids And Arrests Po7 DARIO CARLO -- EL MUNDO Staff Writer Heavily armed police and National Guard patrols continued yesterday to search the residences of Nationalists in the San Juan area and elsewhere on the island. Numerous other arrests were made at the barracks throughout the island, in an effort to clarify all angles of the Nationalist revolt which kept the island in a state of alarm for three days. The Police and the National Guard, called in to deal with the emergency, are still on alert. The entrances to the capital and to public, federal and island buildings, especially the Fortaleza, official residence of the Governor, are still under surveillance. No one is allowed to approach the Santa Catalina Palace, with the exception of public officials, government employees and persons residing or working in the area closest to the Fortaleza. Journalists were also not allowed to circulate freely in the surrounding area. The residence of the Nationalist leader, Don Pedro Albizu Campos, continues to be guarded by the Police and blocked by public cleaning trucks of the Government of the Capital, crossed on the roads leading to it. The regency was closed after the end of the inspection made by the prosecutors, after the arrest of Mr. Albizu Campos. In addition to the arrest of nationalists, communists and suspicious persons who could shed light on the nationalist rebellion, the Police and the National Guard had (Continued on Page 16, Col. 7)
Db Registration Held Today Women Islandwide Must Be in Colleges Before 1:00 P. M. List of San Juan Colleges. Men Will Go Tomorrow The new voters who will "swear in their registration petitions" must be at the polling places of their respective precincts today and tomorrow, before 1:00 p.m., at which time they must be at the polling places of their respective precincts. M., at which time the polls will close, as provided by law. Today Saturday is the registration of women; tomorrow Sunday is that of men".
When reporting on the matter, an official of the Insular Board of Elections gives the necessary instructions, which consist of (a) to go to the registration polling places before 1:00 P. M.; (b) to bring the registration forms to the polling places before 1:00 P. M.; (c) to bring the registration forms to the polling places before 1:00 P. M. M.; (b) to bring the petition forms duly prepared in quadruplicate, except that they should not be filled out or fingerprinted. The petition blanks are available, according to the Information of the IBE, at the information committees or offices of the various political parties and in the possession of the municipal judges, who act as chairman of the Local Board. In accordance with the Law, the following are entitled to preference for registration purposes: women in a pregnant state, who must produce the corresponding medical certification to that effect; doctors and nurses in service in clinical and hospital establishments; telegraph and telephone operators; firemen and members of the Insular Police. The persons who have the right of preference to register must request the exercise of this right well in advance of the closing time of the polling stations. This requirement, according to the aforementioned official of the IBE, is due to the fact that the agreements of preference must be adopted unanimously by the members of each Local Board. The electoral cotegies in the First Precinct of San Juan, which includes the city of San Juan and Puerta do Tierra, and the Second Precinct of Santurce, which includes the city of San Juan and Puerta do Tierra, and the Second Precinct of Santurce.
> Cuban Group Backs Off Island Trip Idea Congressmen Undergo Extensive Questioning Miami Cuban congressmen who had announced a visit to San Juan to intervene in the Nationalist conflict have backed off from their trip to Puerto Rico. They "dissolved their" plans after an interrogation at the Immigration offices at the International Airport of Miami, Florida, after which they were admitted to the United States. As will be recalled, Governor Luis Muñoz Marín has expressed that he does not watch "with sympathy" the intervention of the Cubans in the conflict with the Naclonallita. The congressmen were expected in San Juan on Thursday afternoon," and later in the evening," but they did not arrive. At no time did the Governor or the Presidents of the Legislative Chambers send representatives to receive them. Deaiaten De Planea A rtespacho of the United Press reported the following to EL MUNDO yesterday "It was reported today that three" Cuban congressmen desisted of their plans to visit Puerto Rico, after a long interrogation by the Imml (Continued on page 16, Col. 4)
Pueblos Jayuya Tried to-Attack Elio Torresola Nationalist Leader and 3 - Comrades Arrested for Pitching Fire Mail By Lula Ranche" Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer - Federal authorities yesterday made the first arrests of nationalists accused of violating federal laws as a result of recent events on the island. Several federal court marshals and post office agents who were pursuing the nationalists who set fire to the Jayuya post office arrested Ello Torresela Roura, Fidel Irizarry Rivera, Ramon Robles Rlvera and Fidel Irizarry Rivera. Ramon Robles Rlvera and Marlo Irizarry. The four Nationalists are accused by the Office of the Acting U.S. Attorney Famélico Ponsa Fellú. of having caused malicious destruction of federal property by burning the Jayuya post office, when the Nationalists' activities in that town culminated in the burning of several houses. Imprisoned / They were taken before the Federal Commissioner. Ramón C. Tulló. who set bail of 325,000 to each one of the accused to be able to remain "n provisional freedom. The four nationalists were then admitted to the prison of La Princesa. This is the first action taken by federal authorities in Puerto Rico against nationalists who have participated in the recent events. Federal agents are expected to make other arrests in connection with the fire at the Jayuya post office, according to Harry Stolberg, Post Office Inspector. On the verge of lynching him Relating what happened during the Torresola arraignment, Mr. Stolberg said that the people of Jayuya (Continued on page 16, Col. 4)
Another "Battle of the Bend" in Korea
wtiím "mn r V uCTor a . NORTH PYONGYANG r "Hw J"'''r SOUTH - KOREA g
The Reds" maintain their greatest threat to the United Nations" forces in the Unan" area, (inside the circle) where some" battalions have been "surrounded" and "cut off from" communication" clone", according to a report" received" on November 8. On the west side, the Allied troops advanced to a point 18 miles from Rinulju on the Manchurian border. In the northeast the American troops were fighting in Pungsan. No major "changes" were reported in the Hambung area of P. A.) Yew York Times Says Puerto Ricans Should Not Be Blamed for Truman Incident Should Not Hinder Island's Political and Economic Progress An editorial in the Senate that "no 4Mw Incalporoo " tm>pnu arrlqueñoa on the whole, nor allow this" Incident (the attempt on Truman) to retard progress toward self-government and economic development of the Island", was published yesterday, Friday, by the New York Times.
York Times. "I should not forgive the fact that a regiment of Puerto Rican soldiers is fighting in Korea and that the Puerto Rican people are good, educated and law-abiding citizens". The full text of the New York Times statement is as follows: "The assassination attempt on President Truman was not only a dreadful thing. It was more" bewildering and senseless. "In all that can be referred to him, in a personal and official capacity, Trumnn was the last person to be attacked by Puerto Ricans who legitimately advocate independence for the United States. "Truma,n's entire record since he began "his term, highlighted his resolute willingness and even determination to grant Puerto Rico any status quo the Puerto Rican people desired. "He appointed the first native of Puerto Rico ever to hold the office of Governor, recommended to the Congress that it pass legislation giving Puerto Ricans the right to elect their own officers and to vote for a Constitution of their own making. "The first step in this process will be taken tomorrow, when I will hold a referendum to determine if Puerto Ricans really want a Constitution. Interest in the Island "In his special message to the Con(Continued on page 16, Col. 8)
! Not Now : Congressional Inquiry Won't Happen ; Until Criminal Investigations Are Over ' By William Dorvlllier 1 WASHINGTON, Nov. 3. - ' (Special to THE WORLD) - The ' Senate Committee on Interior and Interior Affairs is considering an on-the-spot investigation of the disorders that occurred in Puerto Rico "at some time" after the national elections, a committee aide said today, ' Joseph C. O'Mahoney, a Wyoming Democrat, said yesterday. Jo- , Wyoming Democrat and chairman of the committee, said it would be investigated "immediately," but today explained that it was likely that the ' group would not act on it until the criminal investigations were completed. O'Mahoney was in the West today and could not leave, but a spokesman for the committee said that if Congress investigates the origin of the nationalist movement in Puerto Rico and its status on the island, it will most likely be investigated by a joint subcommittee of the House Public Lands Committee and the House Committee on the Interior and Insular Affairs (continued on Page 16, Col. 6).
U.S. Troops Qcupy New Positions Dañ For Lost 2 Battalions V Division For RALPH TEATSORTH TOKYO, Saturday, Nov. 4. (P. U.)-American "reinforcements" were marching with difficulty today in rain and cold to new positions for the "battle of the Korean bend," only 20 miles from their vital supply bs'p of Slnaju. After three days of hard fighting and American and South Korean withdrawals, from 9 to 50 miles, Ün Army spokesman admitted that the situation was "unfavorable." The Ame-' rlcana Vigéslmmocuarta Division had been forced < to withdraw up to" 5b miles, after coming within 14 miles of 1" Manchurian border at Slnuljü. Her supply lines and flanks were exposed by the Allied withdrawal at Unsan. 'The main American line of defense is centralized ah<M a at Ipsok and forms an arc of about 20 miles" approximately desdo Sinan jú, three-fourths of the way around the city. Hopes are lost as to two "lost battalions" (Continued on page 16, Col. 1).
ASSEMBLY APPROVES 1 S I FLUSHING ARMED FORCE New York, Nov. 8. (P. U.)-The United Nations General Assembly today overwhelmingly approved the American plan to place a veto-proof International armed force at "u disposal for launching against aggressors when the veto blocks emergency action by the Security Council. The resolution, which provides for all members of the United Nations to set aside their national defense forces to launch against aggressors, was adopted by a vote of 8.1 to 8, with 8 abstentions.
1 Leader, Surrenders to Police Mayagüez MAYAGUEZ, November 3. (By Ricardo Villamil, correspondent)- The President of the Nationalist Board of Mayagüez, Rafael Cancel, surrendered this afternoon to the Police after sending a note in which he asked that his life be guaranteed. z Dr. José E. Arrarás and Mr. Babel Pérez served as intermediaries but contrary to what was expected in the sense that other members of the Nationalist Party who were with him also turned themselves in, he said that the others were scattered in the countryside. Mr. Cancel was in a farm on the road to Las Marias, Another" Surrendered It was also reported at the Police Headquarters that today the following Nationalists in Mayagüez went to the police station to surrender: Remigio Soto, Luis Méndez Pérez, Amado E. Peña Ramírez, Lula Cuebaa Ca(Contlnued on page 16, Col 3)
Accusations For Attack Already Prepared
New York City Raid Underway
Federal Authorities Summon Nationalists! By UNITED PRESS Federal prosecutors announced that Oscar Collazo, a Nationalist survivor of the shooting at President Truman's residence, will be indicted as soon as possible as "a common murderer. ( , Meanwhile, in New York, Mrs. Carmen Otero Torresola. The 22-year-old widow of nationalist Griselio Torresola, who was the mastermind of the attempt on President Truman, was questioned yesterday by federal prosecutors. At the same time, agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation were scouring the suburbs of New York's Latin Quarter in search of the likely conspirators in the fantastic plot to assassinate President Truman. Yesterday morning, Friday, President Truman visited the two White House guards who were wounded in the shooting and thanked Jet for thwarting the attempt on his life on Wednesday. Doctors allowed Mr. Truman to spend only two minutes with guards Donald T. Blrdzell and Joseph Downs. The U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia announced that early next week it will seek the indictment of Oscar Collazo, charging him with premeditated murder, for the death of a White House guard during the attempt to assassinate President Truman. At the same time, the Prosecutor's Office refused to say if it will ask for the prosecution of other people for helping this "nacloriallsta" in his fantastic attempt against the life of the President. The bullet-riddled body of Grisello Torresola, Collaso's accomplice in the shootout against the Casa Bialr, lies in the local morgue, without anyone having claimed it so far. The Joverv widow of Torresola and her six months old baby were arrested pro- , ventively in New York. No charges have been filed against Mrs. Torresola, but Rosa Collazo, Oscar's wife, is being held on fifty thousand dollars bail, accused of complicity in the attempted murder. r - May Jusguen Albizu * With Collazo - In Puerto Rico many other nationalists have been arrested, including their leader, Pedro Albizu Campos, There are probabilities that Albizu will be prosecuted together with Collazo, since in Torresola's clothes were found two letters from Albizu in which he told the dead man that he would assume the leadership of the Puerto Rican nationalist movement in the United States "without any hesitation whatsoever". The U.S. Attorney for the District of Columbia, Georg" Morris, said that the judicial mechanism to prosecute Oscar Collazo as a common murderer will begin to operate at the end of the week with the presentation of evidence to the Grand Jury (Continued on page 16, Col. 3).
National Guard Restores Order in Jayuya.
✓ . _ . . .. -- 1 ■V 111- AH ■ 1231
We publish some aspects of the activities of the Guardia Naclonaljle Puerto Rico, in restoring order in the town of Jayuya, which had been dominated by the Insurrecta This" are official photographs taken by the National Guard. Left to right
From left to right, in the foreground, a group of National Guard soldiers, already inside the town, takes aim and shoots at the hill, from where the Nationalists are shooting at the population. Note in the background, the effect of the fire provoked by the nationalists when the village is occupied.
the village. In the background, a guard eeeolta two of Ion naeionallata", who surrendered. A group of aoldadoa observes them. Third, on a stretcher, a civilian mortally wounded in the lower abdomen receives emergency aid. In the background,
-1 sergeant Wenceslao Torres, of the Second Battalion of the 895th. receives emergency treatment, wounded in the shoulder in the shootings of Ja; Tiya. (Photos of the National Guard, by ol sergeant Gilbert Rodrigues),