THE WORLD
??°>ÍP? WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND TODAY: - Partly cloudy with a few isolated light showers today and tonight. Light to moderate easterly winds. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 90 degrees; low, 69 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:90 p.m., 30.05 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, April 13 (PU). - In the afternoon today ae Reported laa someone too temperature*: New York, 41) Chicago, 91) Washington, 40¡ Miami, ( 9S. Forecast for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: mostly sunny, trio pore. Maximum temperature, 4®.
TOMORROW'S DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 15, 1950
NUMBER 13990
FIVE CENTS
No Longer Expected To Save Ten From Lost Plane
However Sigile 'Intense Search' Will Maintain Aircraft Patrol In Baltic. - Blush Insist Fired By ROBERT MUSEL COPENHAGEN, jbrll 14. - (PU) - The U.S. Air Force has virtually abandoned all hope of saving the crewmen of the Navy plane "Privateer," missing since Saturday, but has ordered the search in the Baltic to continue with full intensity, Officials said in particular that they have no hope of saving the ten crewmen. The rescue service headquarters announced in the mid-afternoon that ten of the five ships scouring the area had been ordered to return to their bases. But ten minutes later the same center rectified the announcement and said that it had been ordered to continue the search, "with a maximum effort, without reduction". I understand that the decision to reduce efforts was overruled by "the highest centers of the U.S. Air Force" perhaps in Washington. As a result, the Seventh Savage Squadron will maintain 20 to 25 aircraft patrolling the Baltic. They believe that the unarmed four-engine plane crashed and sank without a trace after being the target of Soviet fighter fire. The Russians made the accusation that the aircraft had flown over the Soviet republic of Latvia. Yesterday Moscow radio said that the "Privateer" they were looking for was the plane against which their planes fired on Saturday, but insisted that the American plane fired first. Moscow also announced last night that four Soviet airmen had been awarded the Order of the Red Banner "for excellent performance of their duties in the service". American airmen were speculating as to whether this would be the reward to the Soviet airmen for attacking the "Privateer". An Air Force spokesman said they almost vanished (Continued on page 14, Col. 6) Conjecture About Nevada N. Y. Yesterday Associated With Rainmaking Test NEW YORK, April 14. (PU) - Despite the Weather Bureau bulletin attributing it to the storm that descended from the Arctic along the eastern coast of the American hemisphere, New Yorkers are not convinced that the unusual snowfall yesterday and today at noon is not due to the efforts of Dr. Wallace Howell to produce artificial rain by bombarding the clouds with dry ice. For his part, Dr. Howell has not been able to clarify whether his attempts yesterday gave greater force to the snowfall which today caused the suspension of the exhibition ball games in New York. Philadelphia and Boston at the same time that the cold snap forced the cancellation of games in other cities. In fact, the snowfall gained strength after Dr. Howell dropped ice from a police plane in the Catskill Mountains to bring rain to increase the water reserves in the reservoirs of the aqueduct that supplies the city.
CONSTRUCTION RECORD BROKEN WASHINGTON, April 14. - (P, U.) The Nation broke all records for home construction last week and its heyday continues, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said today. In March, when construction began on 110,000 residential units, it continued the progress of the past nine months, in which contractors have broken all of their 1049 records on a steadily increasing basis. F.n the first three months of the year, 270,000 homes were started, exceeding the figure for the corresponding period last year by 59 percent. The total was M percent higher than in February, and 59 percent higher than in March of the previous year. Boaton, Detroit, St. Louis, New York, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Dallaa, Houston Forth Worth and Milwaukee. Air Supply Carried Yesterday To Expedition Plane Left Caracas Morning.-Indians Return To La Culebra PONCE. April 14.(Pm- Miguel Rlvera)-The Puerto Rican expedition on its way to Marahuata in the Venezuelan jungle expected to receive the first air supply at 1:00 P. M. yesterday. The supply was to consist of foodstuffs, equipment and correspondence and was to consist of 25 packages. It was reported that the plane carrying the supply departed at 9:15 A.M. yesterday from La Caracas airport. M. yesterday from La Carlota airport in Caracas, making a stopover in San Fernando at 11:00 A.M., from where it was to continue on to San Fernando. M., from where it would continue its journey to the area where the expedition is located. The expedition has been receiving instructions from amateur radio stations in connection with the first supply being sent to them, one of these instructions being that they should only prepare a single campfire that will allow them to observe the wind direction. Captain Denols, of the Venezuelan Air Force tinged* the purpose of launching himself in paracaldas to examine the landing strip constructed at La Culebra and give his approval, of aer its satisfactory conditions. Information received from the expeditionaries indicates that they have already returned to La Culebra two groups of Indians who took part of the equipment to Papuca; from here they will go directly to Marahuata. Another group of Indians left last Thursday, to take the rest of the equipment. The one that would receive yesterday by air the expeditionaries, will be dispatched in the morning of today towards Papuca. The expedition, according to the last reports received, already owns an extensive and varied collection of birds, reptiles and plants of various kinds, and is expected to leave as soon as possible to the place of its final objective. Barnés Speaks - Sisters Don Francisco Girón, of the firm Valdejully & Segarra, of this city, spoke with Ventura Barnés using, the station KP4ES, of the licensed Pedro Pizá, offering him the shipment of rope to the Indians through the American Embassy in Caracas. Barnés spoke with his sisters Belén and Denis, residents in Ponce. One of them ordered him a certain yerba Indígena, whose use is considered effective in the treatment of asthma (Continued on page 14 col. 9).
Police Take Precautions Before Former University Students' Meeting
By Luis Hernández Aqulno EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Rio Piedras Police took greater precautions on the occasion of the announced celebration of the second anniversary of the university strike, which did not take place, as had been announced as the first intention. The Mayor of Rio Piedras, Mr. Augusto P. Alvaros, cancelled the permit issued to the Committee of Expelled Students of the University to hold a rally in the halls of the Municipality. On the other hand, he left in place another permit for them to hold the rally in the Plaza do Recreo, which was announced to take place last night. Police Visit Campus Early in the morning, after the event was originally announced for 8:00 a.m. yesterday, the Rio Piedras Police Commissioner visited the campus in his official car,
José Barrado, and his deputy, Lieutenant Secundino Vélez, also visited the campus with a group of detectives traveling in a jeep. In several intersections of the city there were policemen on duty and the university guard was waiting for what could happen, since the news was that "possibly a demonstration would take place all the way to the University". Mayor Calls Rector The Mayor of Rio Piedras, Mr. Alvarez, contacted the Interim Rector of the University, Dr. Ramón Mellado. The Mayor of Rio Piedras told Dr. Mellado that he had proceeded to cancel the grant given to the Expelled University Students Committee, because it was understood, according to "the President, that they intended to hold a public meeting at the Mayor's Office and a public meeting at the University, and that they were going to hold a public meeting at the University.
Senate Passes $1,000,000 To Retasación
Approves Expenditures By Various Municipalities
Bill Regulates Practice Of Radiology Technician Profession On 1st Island
The Department of the Treasury will have an additional $1,000,000 to complete the reassessment of property, if the bill approved last night in the Upper House, Senate Bill 189, which assigns said Department $1,000,000 to continue the project of cadastre, classification and scientific appraisal of property, authorized by Act 117 of 1947, becomes law. The following appropriations were also approved, in the bills related: S. P. 138, allocating to the municipality of Vieques the amounts of $25,000 and fifteen thousand dollars. The first to contribute to the expenses of said municipality during the 1950-51 fiscal year, and the second for the purchase of a "Grader" and the repair of the Mayor's Office of said municipality. P. S. 906, authorizing the Treasurer and the Auditor of Puerto Rico to make available to the Commissioner of the Interior the amount of 40,000 for the construction of two kilometers of the road known as Mllaflores-Arrozal, in Arecibo.
P. de la C. 118, assigning the surplus resulting from the $10,000 fund created by Act 271 of 1947, once the project has been liquidated, so that the Commissioner of the Interior may expropriate the land necessary for the construction of a road, towards Peñuelas Beach. /
The following bills authorizing several Municipal Assemblies to include various items in their budgets for the payment of debts contracted by Jos municipalities were also approved on third reading: P. S. 1105- Authorizing the Municipality of Humacao to include in its regular budget for the 1950-51 fiscal year and successive years the amount of ten thousand nine hundred eighty-four dollars and six cents ($10,984.86) to cover additional expenses of that municipality during the 1948-49 fiscal year. P. S. 1104- Authorizing the Municipality of Yabucoa to include in its regular budget for fiscal year 1950-51 and successive years the sum of six hundred sixty-four dollars and forty cents ($664.40) to cover additional expenses of said municipality during fiscal year 1948-49.
P. S. 533 - Authorizing the Municipal Assembly of Las Pie* drag to include in its regular budget for the 1950-51 fiscal year or in the budget of subsequent years, the amount of three thousand forty-two dollars and fifty-nine cents ($3,042.59) to pay debts contracted by said municipality with the following firms: Betances Pharmacy, $521.86: German Flores $235.69; Barreto and Company $234.69; Biltmore Laboratories $635.25; Mendez Laboratories $415. 25; General Medicine $812.20; Willward Truck Co. $197.75; for services rendered to said municipality; authorizing said municipality to proceed with the payment of said debts, subject to the verification thereof by the Auditor of Puerto Rico. P. of the C. 494- Assigning the (Continued on page 14, Col. 8)
Vega Baja Police Searches for Family of Unknown Young Lady who sheltered her for 3 Months. Sick Woman Gave Names of Justa, and Julia Rivera Santos
By Corlo" Niovu Rivoro Editor of EL MUNDO Laa autoridadei de Vega Baja catán Interested in locating loa relatives of a young woman who judging by iu behavior suffers from amnesia, or loss of memory, since it does not remember "zainamente au- nombro o ol o ol of its pedroo, nor ol place of quo comes from. The doctor Rojeo Deporta, municipal doctor of Vega Baja, referred yesterday to oote redactor ol caao do an unknown young woman, that was confined in the hocpital do eco town, vara so < put it to oboervación while their relatives appear whose whereabouts m Ignora. According to the report of the Vega Baja police station, Jane Doe (identified there as Julia Rivera Santoo) is 19 years old, 66 inches tall and weighs 110 pounds. No Recuerdo Nombro However, ol doctor Rojeo
Daporta, who in your capacity as municipal physician has examined the young lady, told eete redactor that apparently she does not remember her own name exactly, but that inva. Reliably she knows herself by the surname Rivera. On the other hand, he referred the writer to the Vega Bala Public Welfare office, where they could inform more extensively about the encounter of the sick girl, by a lady resident in the Sabana neighborhood of that town, and other details of the case. The aforementioned office was not very helpful to the Press for the purpose of public information, being reluctant to allow another employee to fill in the required information in the file. In fact, the latter offered vague information about the whereabouts of the lady who offered her services (Continued on page 12, Col. 9).
Constitution Bill May Be Passed This Year
* ' ' BIS' J 11 n SU W ktwíoj® i < Jw ® L U £r v-'WB O U IB } ¿ &f N®! 1 1 1 "y W". w JMrsmte, Ir P, . - éwiOSb 'í x H- Á í íimSiBJqCi - *TÍ ■ BL so In i " Ll * nJ - a wMU i 9 jH A ¡T IA -r- Ar* ™ Mm í M M 'i;
The Governor of Puerto Rico and president of the Popular Democratic Party, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, met Thursday afternoon with the party's leadership at the party's headquarters in the Industrial Algodonera building, Parada 17 of Fernández Juncos Avenue, in Santurce. The event was attended by members of the Central Committee and majority legislators. From left to right, seated in the front row: José Cestero Guardiola, Benjamín Ortiz, Dr. Antonio Femó* Isern, Governor Muñoz Marín, Fernando Jullá Calder, Redro Nelson Col berg, Jesús Tscoa Moure.
Tscoa Moure. Manuel Rivera Bnerga, Joaquín Torres Noriega, an unidentified gentleman and Carlos Rabease. Second row: seated. Arcillo Alvarado. Standing, in the same order: Rafael Torroch Genovés, Augusto Valentín Vlzcarrondo, Rafael Ajionte Sánchez, Ubaldlnp Ra* mire* de Arellano, José Mimoso Raspaldo, Cruz Pacheco Rula, Merlo Cénalos, Alvaro Rivera Reyes, Agustin Burgos, Ildefonso Solé .Morales, Francisco Sánchez, Luis Alfredo Colón, an unidentified person, Rubén Gaztamblde Arrlllaga. Dionisio Casillas and Angel M. Candelario (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Omar Bradley Believes War Is Possible He Points Out That World Is Divided.-Plains U.S. CHICAGÓ.'~abriirÍ4"(PU) - Gen. Omar N. Bradley, chairman of the combined chiefs of staff, declared that "the world is facing the po. slbllldad of a war because it is divided at this time." "We would be detached from reality if we did not understand that for two years, the atomic bomb, the American Air Force and the tremendous Industrial potentialities of this Nation and its allies, have worked miracles in deterring aggression. "It is my firm belief that with our continued aid and support, the faithful North Atlantic Pact and its organization for security and defense can quickly become a greater force for peace than any one nation could bring alone. This will be a greater deterrent in 1 a war than any bomb that has ever existed." Bradley said in his speech that it is possible that the Atlantic Pact may require each nation to devote itself to one or two types of military power and stated, "It is possible, for example, that the defensive plans of the Pact may require us to maintain a larger Air Force and Fleet than we would normally think of contributing." (Continued on page 12, Col. 5)
Census As of Thursday Interviewed 1,393,133 Persons on Island Today Industrial Census Questionnaires* Sent Out. The Census Bureau for Puerto Rico reported that its enumerators had interviewed a total of 1,393,133 persons throughout the island by last Thursday, at the end of thirteen full days of enumeration.
v throughout the island. * The local director of the Census, Mr. Felix, revealed that the total number of persons enumerated could have been higher, but that the constant rains in the mountainous areas, especially in Aguadilla, have had a great influence on the enumeration work. However, the head of the Census Bureau considers that an excellent job has been done and that all the enumerators are doing their best to finish the enumeration on the indicated date, that is, in the middle of May 1950. Industrial and Business Census On the other hand, Mr. Mejlas de. clarified that the questionnaires of the Industrial Census are being sent today to the Puerto Rican Industrialists. It is expected that next Monday they will be in their hands, and that these, once they fill them out in their own businesses, will return them no later than May 1, 195C. Mr. Mejlas indicated that two types of questionnaires have been prepared and are being sent to the Industrialists. One short or better to say simple. The other, longer or more complicated. The questionnaires will be as follows (Continued on page 14, Col. 3)
New Marina Settlement To Be Built To House 250 Families Now Residing In Huts The Municipal Housing Authority will build a settlement to house 250 of the families currently living in huts and angles in the San Junn hull. The house will be built in La Marina and it is considered that it would be insufficient to accommodate all the residents of the Capital who live in undesirable conditions, so the AMH has recommended the convenience of its transfer to the houses built in Puerta de Tierra, Santurce and Cataño. In a meeting called by the President of the House of Representatives, Mr. Ernesto Ramos (Continued on page 14, Col. 4)
This young woman is confined in the municipal hospital of Vega Baj* from the day tree of the current suffering, apparently, of amneela or loss of the memory. Her exact name is unknown, but it is believed that her last name is Rivera Bentos, and that her relatives live in the Tofta neighborhood of Cayey, Vega Baja authorities are interested in locating her relatives. (Photo EL MUNDO, by Luis Morales).
Bill On The Use Of Hedonic Acids House Committee Had Just Recommended That It Be Approved House Bill 891, known as "the hedonic acid bill," was withdrawn by its author, Rep. Rafael Aponte Sánchez, after being recommended for approval by the Agriculture Committee in last Thursday's session. Aponte Sanchez, who had been insisting that the bill be discharged from the Committee and be taken to the floor for discussion, announced the withdrawal of the measure at a time when the Committee's report was submitted to the House, constituted as a full Committee. The explanation offered by the author of the bill for its withdrawal was in the sense that he considered that he had presented the bill too late for it to have a chance of being approved by the Legislature in this session. The announcement of its withdrawal by the author of the measure was welcomed by the House with applause. Provisions of the Bill The bill "regulating the use of 1a hedlondla as a coffee substitute*. expressed in its explanatory statement: "There is a general impression that the legislation in force, protecting the public against the adulteration of coffee, prohibits the use of the hedionda bean as a coffee substitute. The Legislature of Puerto Rico understands that it is convenient to approve legislation clarifying that such concept is erroneous, and also to state that the promotion of the use of hedionda as a coffee substitute will alleviate the deficiency between the production and the local consumption of coffee, reduce the importation of foreign coffee, promote a new local industry and redound to the general benefit of the community. The measure, in its First Section provides: "The cultivation, processing, sale and consumption of the bean (Continued on page 14. Col. 1).
Dr. Fernós Fears, The Time Factor - r I Muñoz Marín Attended r A Meeting of Directors of the Popular Party f By Juan Martines Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO f The proposed Constitution has an enemy that may cause it to fail this year. That enemy 1 is time, according to what Resident Commissioner Antonio - Fernós Isern said the day before yesterday at a meeting of directors of the Partido Popular De- ' mocrátlco. t ] Mr. Muñoz Marín attended, for the first time since he became Governor, a partisan political meeting, and explained the reasons. In order to listen to Dr. Fernós Isern, the directors of the Popular Democratic Party met the day before yesterday at the party's headquarters in Santurce. In addition to the members of the Central Committee, the Popular legislators, some members of the Cabinet and other politicians were invited to the event. Mufles Dló presided over the assembly. Of special importance to the assembly was the fact that Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, governor of Puerto Rico and head of the collectivity, presided over it. It was the first time in the history of Puerto Rico that the Governor publicly presided over a political party re 1 union. From four o'clock in the afternoon, the guests began to arrive at the Party's offices in Santurce for the event that was scheduled to begin at five o'clock; but which began at a quarter past five, when President Muñoz Marín entered the hall, amidst enthusiastic applause. The large room was too small for the audience, most of whom did not know exactly what the purpose of the meeting was. Mr. Muñoz Marín opened the event with a short speech, in which he said that he was happy to be meeting with a group of directors of the Popular Party. He explained that as Governor he attends to and defends the rights of all; but that as head of a party that elected him Governor, he must see to it that what was offered to the people in the elections in which he was elected is fulfilled. He recalled that governors until now were appointed and represented and responded to the appointing power. Principle of Election Although as individuals they were born to some party, as governors they had no formal relationship with any of the political groupings. We are initiating," he said, "the principle of the elective governor, who from now on will have to belong to the majority party. On the other hand, he belongs to a political party that elected him on the basis of a program. He undoubtedly has the right and the duty to promote the program of the party on the basis of which he was elected". This is common, he explained, in all democracies. In the United States, foreign policy is bipartisan. Republican* leaders such as Vandenberg, Austin and others join President Truman in carrying out plans* beneficial to the country; but he is also president-elect of the Democratic Party, and he is president of that party and attends the conventions and important events of the collectivity. After this explanation, Mr. Muñoz Marín gave the floor to the Resident Commissioner, whose work in Washington he described as excellent. Dr. Fernó" was received with a hearty round of applause. (Continued on page 12, Col. 9)
Army Here Denies Rumor That It Declared "Alert".
By Benjamin SANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO Yesterday the rest of the Puerto Rican troops belonging to Battalion 504 and other units disorganized or disbanded as a result of the reorganization being carried out in the Army embarked for Panama. Those who embarked last week were personally received by Major General Ray E. Porter, head of the U.S. Army. Porter, head of the U.S. Army in the Caribbean, and many other senior officers. General Porter, who was formerly Chief of the Military Department in the West Indies, with headquarters in San Juan, was cheered by the Puerto Rican troops on arrival at Balboa, Canal Zone, when he promised that everything in his power would be done "to make the work of every man on the job as pleasant as possible". The Army's Office of Public Informa
c of the Army yesterday denied rumors that "an alert" had been declared, reporting instead that "everything is normal here". 504th Field Artillery Battalion 504th Field Artillery Battalion has been the only unit transferred entirely from Puerto Rico to Panama, due to the reorganization of the Army. It has been assigned to Fort Kobbe, Panama Canal Zone, as the artillery unit of the 33rd Combat Infantry Regiment, billeted in Panama. The first man down the steps of the Jose M. Martinet transport on its arrival at Balboa was Sgt. 1st Class Justino Flores, according to Major John O'Grady, Army Public Information Officer. The sergeant was congratulated by General Porter and the other senior officers present at the ceremony (Continued on page 14, Col. 7),