THE WNUO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Medium cloudy with dlaperooo showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low, 75 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at lac 4186 this afternoon, 80.01 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Aug. 9. (PU). - Xa the torito d* today 8* laforaMumi la* eiguieato* temperature": New York, Ms Chteage, Mt Wáahlngton, U; MteYew York and doubtful* venia**: tietnm good. Tenperatom aükxina, M
diary of THE tangle
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered M Bfinnd cIam matterPost Offlca, San Juan? P. K.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, AUGUST 5, 1950
NUMBER 14101
FIVE CENTS
U. S. Counterattacks Stop Red Onslaught Russia Proposes Cease Fight, Withdraw Foreign Troops
Malik Launched Surprise Petition
Austin Claims Dilatory Tactics Appealed Against U.S. Motion For RRUCEMUNN LAKE SUCCESS. New York, Aug. 4. (PU)-Russia proposed today that the United Nations order the immediate suspension of hostilities "and the effective withdrawal of all foreign troops" from Korea. LAKE SUCCESS: Russian delegate Jacob A. Malik had the U.N. Security Council discuss for up to two and a half hours procedural questions and then declared a recess until next Tuesday. The West's acceptance of the recess came as a surprise, because the United States had been expected to insist that the Council vote on a resolution condemning the continuing North Korean challenge to the UN and calling on all members to refrain from "aiding and abetting** the Red Korean Invasion. Soviet chief delegate Jacob A. Malik also demanded that the Council invite the Chinese Communist regime and the North Korean authorities to send representatives to the Security Council. As the Council met to condemn the U.S. resolution condemning the continuing challenge to the U.N., and demanding that all members refrain from "aiding or encouraging" the invasion of the Korean Reds, Malik drew his diplomatic surprise. The Soviet delegate proposed a resolution to counter a measure that the United States, in a shrewd diplomatic move last Monday - the day before Malik broke a twenty-nine week boycott of the United Nations to assume the presidency of the Council in his regular turn. It was the first formal presentation of Russia's "peace" plan for the Korean war. Its resolution ignored the sanctions imposed against North Korea at the June 25 session of the Council. It called for the removal of the formidable allied expeditionary force mobilized by U.N. member nations in response to urgent appeals by Secretary General Trygve Lio for ground troops to fight the North Korean Reds. The resolution proposed an order for the suspension of hostilities, as if such action had not been previously adopted by the Council when the Korean war began, and demanded the immediate withdrawal of "all foreign forces". This meant that the Allied forces, fighting under the direction of General Douglas MacArthur as supreme commander of the United Nations Unified Command, should immediately abandon their positions on the southeastern tip of Korea, to which more and more shoulders and materials were arriving daily for the expected counteroffensive. It was expected that Malik would ask that representatives of North Korea be admitted to the Council debate on the issue, but his demand that Communist China also be admitted to the session came as a surprise. It was an indication that the Kremlin has decided to maintain the issue of Chinese representation on the Council at every possible opportunity. (Continued on page 18, Col. 5)
Senator Lanham Nearly Assaulted Witness During Hearing
WASHINGTON, Aug. 4. (PU) Rep. Henderson Lanham, D-Georgia, 83, was forcibly detained by Capitol guards today when he assaulted a Negro witness who called him a liar during a House committee meeting. The witness was William L. Patterson, 59, executive secretary of the Communist-dominated Civil Rights Congress. Patterson had been subpoenaed to appear before the House committee investigating the lobbying, of which Lanham is Acting Chairman. The incident arose out of a bitter exchange of views on civil rights in Georgia.
Patterson observed that he was busy trying to save colored defendants from "legal lynching" in Georgia and other southern states when he was called to testify before the committee. Lanham replied that his. state "has never tried to lynch anyone." "It's a Hatchet state,"-> said Patterson, Says It's a Lie "IF you say bear, you're telling a lie." - Lanham shouted. - "If there's any state where blacks are tried fairly it's Georgia." "What you say is a lie, too" - shouted Pattorson. The stately, bald-headed congressman rose from his seat, smiling, and said to himself, "What you say is a lie, too."(Continued on page 16 Col. I)
U.S. Soldier. Capture Prisoner
L <>;<v-i ' - Yesr : V ! í : \ BRW - nBOGK i Y I t w* B B B Private First Class Jesse Blllian, of St. Louis, Michigan brings to an American command post a North Korean soldier with -- .i-n -n -i--<■* ■ ■■ Iismamifc-m^smMsABsa^Bepewmm^uses^sBSMM--S--m House Approves Bill To Punish Hoarding.
Postpones Action on Price, Wage Controls Favorably Recommended Senate Committee By REX CHANEY WASHINGTON, Aug. 4 (PU) - The Senate Banking Committee today approved controls on prices, wages and items deemed to be in short supply to be invoked when the situation warrants, after the House had reversed the idea amid a heated debate in the House on a bill to punish hoarding.
Rules To Defer Reservists Also To National. Will Not Defer For Reason Dependency By DAYTON MOORE WASHINGTON, Aug. 4 - (PU) - The Defense Department set strict standards for occupational deferments for reservists and National Guardsmen and gave the final say to the Army, Navy and Air Force on whether they will be called to active duty.
A session of great confusion ensued. Senator John J. Sparkman, Democrat of Alabama, announced that the Committee had agreed "in principle" to authorize Mr. Truman to invoke price and wage controls at his discretion-the kind of controls which the Executive has repeatedly demanded. The person! of the Committee was ordered to formulate detailed legislation for formal approval on Monday. Meanwhile the House opposed the idea of price controls, postponing final action until next Tuesday. Before recessing for the weekend, the House decided to make hoarding a federal crime with fines of up to ten thousand dollars and sentences of up to one count. The anti-hoarding proposition (Continued on page 10 Col. 6)
The tiers will be used to determine whether men working in 48 critical occupations and 72 defense-essential industries. will be called up. But the lists of occupations, prepared by the Departments of Commerce and Trnbajo, are only a "gula" for the. armed servicemen and do not provide for automatic dlferlmlent. The case of Army, Navy and Air Force reservists and of every National Guardsman called to active duty will be decided on its merits if the individual qualifies for kliforlmlonto. Loo dlferi(Contlnued on p. 16, col. 4)
22 Cents Shall Be the Price of Butter ♦ ,
AGS Observes National Market Says There Are Sufficient Quantities on the Island. - Mejias Explains Program By RURIOOE. RIVERA EL MUNDO Staff Writer As of noon today, Saturday, consumers will pay twenty-two cents per pound of butter, according to the new price order issued yesterday by Mr. Felix Mejias, Acting Director of the General Supply Administration. The following are the maximum prices for butter for consumers, according to the order given yesterday by Supplies: twenty-two ctvoi. Ib. for canned butter, twenty-three cents per pound for packaged butter, ninety-eight cents for four pound cans of butter: and one dollar and thirty-two cents for five pound cans of butter. According to what Mr. Mejias told reporters yesterday, "this decision was made after a careful study of the conditions of the local market and the Chicago market, which is the island's supplier. Future Orders Mr. Mejlas added that "the new price makes it possible to put present butter stocks on the market and also to place orders for future deliveries at the prevailing costs in the United States, which is highly advisable since the international situation could provoke a sudden reduction in shipments. "It is not in the best interest of consumers to set a lower maximum price" - said Mejlas, Mejlas will study market changes Mr. Mejias' statements further state that "his administrative policy will be to stu(Continued on page 16, Col. 6)
Enrollment May Reach Half a Million
There will be 695 New Classrooms Also 250 Additional Teachers Will Work During the New School Year By BeñjamínSAÑTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer About 500,000 children are expected to go to the classroom next Monday, as the new school year opens, according to estimates made by the Department of Instruction. In connection with the opening of classes, Commissioner Mariano VIHaronga yesterday made important statements on the curriculum reform to be implemented under the direction of the Technical Division. "The opening of the new curriculum," commented Commissioner VIHaronga, "marks a milestone in the effort of the People of Puerto Rico, through the Department of Instruction, to solve the problem of out-of-school children and to improve the diet and health conditions of the thousands of children who are out of school. The school dining halls will begin operating next Monday, for which the necessary arrangements have already been made regarding personnel and food, New Classrooms * As a result of the program of construction of the Mlonos, 340 new classrooms will be inaugurated on Monday in 72 concrete buildings built specifically for school purposes. By the end of this month, 113 additional classrooms will be inaugurated and another 194 will be under construction, for a total of 47 new concrete classrooms, which the Department of Instruction will use this year to accommodate thousands of students currently out of the classroom. In addition, 48 new classrooms will be completed by the end of this month (Continued on page 16 Col. 7).
Estimated 8250,000 Accept ef First For Referendum Candidate Recruitment
A bill appropriating the sum of $250,000 for expenses incurred by the Island Board of Elections on the referendum was introduced in the Senate. Agustín Burgos, Chairman of the Senate Elections Committee, appropriates said sum for the expenses related to the referendum by which the voters of Puerto Rico are to accept or reject the act of Congress authorizing the People of Puerto Rico to draft its constitution and authorizing the General Superintendent of Elections, to be elected by the voters of Puerto Rico, to be held in accordance with the provisions of the law.
The headquarters of the Puerto Rico Selective Service reported yesterday that the first candidate for recruitment into the armed forces accepted under the recent draft was young Carlos Rodríguez Colón, of Santurce, an architect engineer by profession. Rodríguez Colón was one of the first group of 100 young men called to active duty in Puerto Rico, who went to Fort Buchanan on Tuesday for physical and mental examinations. He was the first candidate to pass the exams, so (Continued on page 16, Col. 3)
Firefighter Captures Unruly Refuge on a Pole
S .■ f jWWíEm.f&& ■;,: ■ -■ ■ ■ ■: ; ; :&- ■ -' ■ d B' H B
Tree firefighters climb up a ladder, based on one of their firefighting trucks, in an attempt to get their hands on one of the unruly QU0 Re climbed up an electric lighting pole in Union Square, New York, to avoid arrest by police, after the police mounted a firefighting truck in the area, after the police mounted a firefighting truck in an attempt to get their hands on one of the unruly QU0 Re climbed up an electric lighting pole in Union Square, New York, to avoid arrest by police.
The firefighters came to the scene to help the protesters after the city's Mounties charged at the demonstrators and broke up a demonstration. Firefighters came to the aid of the police and rounded up all the "pacifists" who climbed on the pole, like the one seen here. (Associated Press photo).
F SOUTH WCAVáütvDivl c 4 1 "YonfdtM I Jr s .a * ■ -v W-wU te/ I 1 I lNBOUTI TO FRONT - ithmc/comutham |9 STATUTSMim 'so]
The map marks the looalliation of various units of the* American troops in the respective* son** of defense on August 6. The broken line roughly marks the line of defense. Other units move to the front of the Clavo supply port at Puoan (Photo by Associated Press).
CSP To Conduct Study On Telephonic Service Will Serve To Indicate The Need For Service In Towns On the occasion of the request for a rate increase filed by the Porto Rico Telephone Company before the Public Service Commission, the latter will conduct a study in the towns of Carolina, Barranquitas, Vega Baja and Fajardo, in order to determine the demand for service in said towns, and use it as an indication for the entire island. . . . Information authorized by Jorge V. Toledo, president of the C8P. Toledo, president of the C8P, when giving to know ol mentioned study, expresses that the same one will be carried out in the course of the month of August, by authorized inspectors of the Commission. Mr. Toledo asked the residents of the four towns mentioned above for all the cooperation they could give to the person who will carry out the work, providing them with the information they may require. The C8P inspectors will identify the persons they interview, showing the corresponding credentials. u End of the Study Mr. Toledo said that "this study is for the purpose of determining the demand that may exist for telephone service in said towns and to use this information as an index to determine the total demand in all the towns and villages of the Island that the Porto Rico Telephone Company serves. On July 1st, the new provisional rates decreed by the Public Service Commission, which establishes a uniform increase of 12 percent in the rates in effect at that date, began to be in effect. The Telephone Company, however, alleges that it needs higher rates in order to be able to provide an efficient service that will yield reasonable profits to the company, and to this effect it has pending a request for rate fixing for the remainder of the year (Continued on page 16 Col. 3).
Vocabulary Tests for UPR Students Higher Council To Determine Extension And If There Are Deficiencies The Higher Education Council of the University of Fort Lauderdale is conducting a study of the vocabulary extension of students entering our first educational center. The first tests began to be carried out with the students who took the physical entrance exam to the University. The Permanent Secretary of the Council, Dr. Ismael Rodriguez Bou, Franklin L. Stovall and David Cruz, from the Superior Council, examined about 150 students yesterday morning. Dr. Rodriguez Bou said that during the summer his office has been working on the preparation of an instrument to measure the size or extent of the students' Spanish vocabulary, with the technical advice of Mr. Franklin L. Stovall. The work will not only be done with university students, but also with high school students and other public schools. Dr. Stovall expressed that this is the first time that this test has been done in Spanish, to determine the vocabulary in that language; others have been done before, but in English, by Dr. Robert Seashore, who has prepared them for North American students. It is a New Technique According to Dr. Rodrigues Bou, the measurement of vocabulary is a new technique, the Seashore method still being in its experimental stage. He has expressed the Permanent Secretary of the Consejo Superior do Enseñanza who has pushed to carry out the test, tree premises set in Puerto Rico. One of them is that of Navarro Tomás, who made a study of Spanish in Puerto Rico, whose conclusion is that the deficiency of the Puerto Rican language in its vocabulary is due to its 11 mi (Continued on page 16, Col. 4).
Drivers' Insurance Expected to Be in Full Force This Month
The law establishing social insurance for chauffeurs is expected to be in full force and effect this August, Acting Labor Commissioner Blas Oliveras said yesterday. Within the next few weeks it is possible that the law will be fully implemented, especially its provisions on the collection of contributions from employers and payment of benefits to eligible drivers. * The law has not been operating in full force and effect because it has been necessary to complete all the pertinent procedures for its implementation. Since before it came into effect on July 1, the Department of Labor and the Department of the Treasury have been working on the implementation of the law, but this work has not been completed, so it has not been possible to complete it.
The loy is not yet fully operational. Mr. Oliveras pointed out that the law was passed last May 15 and since then work has begun on the creation of the division which will be in charge of its administration, personnel, budgeting, registration of drivers and employers, preparation of regulations and forms, etc. This work has taken a long time. This work has taken a long time, so it could not be expected that in July the collection of contributions and payment of benefits to the drivers would begin. The Acting Labor Commissioner referred to protests and complaints" made by some" drivers. (Continued on page 16 Col -)
■ - i , Enemy AI West Pusan Surprised;
Believe Now Regrouping Is Regrouping C o n t i n u e Activity On Chinju Line.Infantrymen See Action 1 By FRANK TREMAINE TOKYO, Saturday, Aug. 5. - (PUF -Shorter" Northan* rican counterattacks have halted the North Korean onslaught against the great supply port of Pusan, sogú* revealed today General' Douglas MaoArthur. But the Communists appear to be regrouping, and are likely to throw two fresh divisions - more than ten thousand men - into the critical southern front, to reinforce the two and a half divisions now there, according to MacArthur, The Unldrf Press dispatches said that aerial eavesdroppings speak of dozens of small enemy reinforcement units, moving toward the front at the southern end defended at the moment" by the Vlgérimoqulnta de Idtontería, with the Vigétimocuart* Division immediately to the north. The American troops attacked the Communists again and again from their line forty-five miles west of Pusan. So effective were the attacks that the Communists, maneuvering for an oupromo attack on Pusan, were caught off balance, and the credent ementa powerful"" United Nations forces gained a precious tlerope, Air Offenriva The United States Air Force, 1o" Navy and Marine planes supported * the Infantry troops in a rocket, bomb and machine gun offensive, all along their rldlonal front* ros. "The latest communiques tonight indicate that the £ rMl6n has not dropped to 10 lar"® of the Chlnjú-Pusán," MacArthur said in "u midnight Friday communique. "The enemy has not yet been able to advance into the area because of * the counter-attacking American forces. "Fighting continues along an area extending from twenty miles southeast, eleven miles east and fifteen miles northeast of Chlnju. "The enemy casualties in the region during the fighting on the third of August were estimated at seven hundred. "Except for friendly and enemy patrol activity, there was nothing new at the front. "Indications are that the Communist forces are regrouping, and are expected to launch two additional di- . visions." The line to the ortho of Chlnjú, as described by MacArthur, places the Communists about forty-five miles east of Pusán, and about ten miles from the port of Matán. Front Line The front line of battle is near Kogannl, nine miles east of Maaan, and at one point on the west side of Chlnju. To the east of ChinJú, the front is near Sagong, fifteen miles to the west of Maaán. To the east of Chlnjú, it touches Ulroyonf, along the Nam. The point where ol Nam meets *1 Nahtong forms the main line of dofenoa to the north. The First U.S. Marine Division, the Second Infantry Division and the mighty Fifth Regimental Combat Team were ready to go all out against the Red Army. The infantrymen, who are at an undesignated point, had their first encounter yesterday. A search patrol, with orders to fire only in case of attack, met an enemy detachment on a hill of 1,000 pioe. The enemy saw the infantrymen and fled in haste. Marine helicopters, together with fighter planes, went in for reconnaissance, transport and evacuation of the wounded. The Marine fighter planes began attacking the enemy on the vital southern front on Thursday, only four hours after taking off from the carrier that will serve as their base. Dertruyon Hungnam Lieutenant General George U Stratomoyer, commanding the Far Eastern Air Force, announced that "I can no longer count" an "important factor in the Korean war" to the great eos(Continued ep page 18, CoL