EL NÍUNDO , DAILY TOMORROW
WEATHER PONO8T1CO8 FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY - Generally cloudy with showers and thundershowers during the day, becoming partly cloudy in the evening, with light showers in the eastern part of the island. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High temperature, M degrees! low 71 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 10.78 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Oct. IT. (FU). -Today afternoon ge Reported thea aiguíent" temperature": Miami, M; New York, M j Chicago, T8; Wáahlng* ton, M. Forecast" for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities "i cloudy. Maximum temperature, M.
THE FIRST NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, OCTOBER 28, 19S0
NUMBER 14184
FIVE CENTS
ANNUAL XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
Communists Decide to Follow Resistance
Allies Go After Vital Plants Are Sources Of Energy In The Yalú. - Confusion Continues Over Chinese By RALPHTEATSORTH TOKYO, Saturday, Oct. 28. (PU) - The "defeated" North Korean "army," possibly reinforced with 40,000 Chinese communist troops defiantly proclaimed today that "we will fight to the last man." But the North Korean proclamation was a dying spasm, for small United Nations units have already reached the Yalu River border between Korea and Manchuria, and a total of 170,000 men of the International force is advancing relentlessly northward. Northwest of Pyongyang, the Fifth Regimental Combat Group of the U.S. 4th Division passed through the U.S. Commonwealth of Nations Brigade at Kassan. 62 miles east of the mouth of the Yalu, and advanced northward toward the Manchurlan border, 58 miles away. To the right of the North Koreans, the South Koreans escaped the twin traps of the Communists and continued westward to seize the vital hydroelectric plants on the Yalu River border. The South Koreans expected to reach the river today. On the east coast, South Korean soldiers in summer uniforms advanced twelve to fourteen miles in a span of twelve hours - ignoring the snowfall - to within five miles of the port city of Songjlh. The cold was so bitter that two soldiers froze to death. The Republicans were 112 miles, as the crow flies, from Hambung. They were being followed by the U.S. Marines. Commanding General Yu Ja" Heun, head of South Korea's Second Corps, said that the Fortieth Corps of Communist China had entered Korea to assist the decimated armies of Red Premier Kim II Sung. General Yu based his dispatch on an account of two Chinese prisoners* of war captured by the South Koreans in the Unsan area. 63 miles north of Pyongyang. The Chinese POWs said that the Communist 118th, 119th and 120th regiments with Rwandan advisers were fighting in Korea. Yu attached more importance to the story than senior American officers, who have tended to give little attention to the prisoners' stories. General Yu said, "We are no longer concerned about the Chinese," and predicted that his Republican troops would make it to another border point today. Lack of Information A spokesman for the First Corps Intelligence Service (Continued ,on page 18. Col. 3"
í Will Be General Manager Of Atomic Commission Marlon IV. Boyer will take over as general manager of the Atomic Energy Commission on November 1. Boyar, who is a native of Munclr, Indiana, is vice-president of the Esso Standard Oil Company. (Photo by P. A.) Student Leaves Medical School Course Alleged Discomfort Here Over Meals ' And Intensive Study - A student of the School of Medicine of Puerto Rico, who started with fifty, among them some women, abandoned his studies in that school, resulting in the first drop in the studies of a career that will take four years for his classmates. According to reports gathered by EL MUNDO, at the beginning of the course there was some uneasiness among the students because of the meals, in the first place, and secondly because of the intense studies they had to undergo to be able to cover the material they were given. It was reported that it was mandatory to read a book in two days, to inform him. On the other hand, it has been decided, according to what we are informed, for the benefit of the students, to cover a complete course in three weeks, and it is said that this is the way it is done in the Medical Schools of the United States. The embryology course was dispatched in three weeks term. State of Nerves The student who abandoned his studies, on the eve of an anatomy exam, is one of the most brilliant that the Colegio de Agriculture do Mayagüez has had, where he came from. His name is MIi guel Oxson. rntural of Guayanilla. ■ This young man has a high school and college record, where he to(Continued on page 18 Col. 6.)
Nine Countries Favor Spain Case
Poland Motion to Postpone Debate on Proposal Defeated by James Canel LAKE SUCCESS. New York, Oct. 27 -(PU)-Nine Latin American countries and the Philippines advocated today at the morning session of the Political Committee of the General Assembly for the revocation of the Assembly's recommendation dated Dec. 12, 1948, to recall from Madrid the heads of accredited diplomatic missions. . The Dominican Republic, Peru, El Salvador. Bolivia, Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua. Haiti. Colombia and the Philippines requested the approval of the proposal presented by seven nations asking for this revocation. Poland asked for adjournment of the debate until Monday to allow time to study the details of the proposal. Argentina and Australia opposed. When the proposition was put to the vote, it was rejected by six votes in favor, 34 against and six abstentions. 34 against and six abstentions. Indivisible Will Virgilio Díaz Ordóñez. Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic, opened the session with a speech in which he said that the United Nations is being diverted from its noble essential purposes if it insists on maintaining in the world two classes of nations, the accepted and the proscribed, the privileged and the disdained. By ■ asserting that peace is Indivisible. 1 must also be considered indivisible the will of all those who desire it, seek it and deserve it. He previously said that approval of the proposition is necessary to "achieve the Indispensable unity" in the defense of Western civiliza1on. Peruvian delegate Fernando Berckmeyer also advocated repeal of the recommendation "because it is truly inconceivable and unacceptable that the policy of double masking that we have been witnessing in terms of economic, trade and commercial relations (Continued on page 18, Col. 2) There Will Be Reduction In Enlistments WASHINGTON, Oct. 27, <PU)-The Armed Forces today announced a reduction in the mobilization of reservists. and the Army said it expects to begin discharging National Guard men, -a*| as others called to duty in the coresna- crisis, next summer. In a lengthy joint statement. the three services outlined lo* plans to carry out recent orders from Secretary of Defense. George C. Marshall, to put the future mobilization of loa reservists on an orderly basis, and to discharge lo* now in uníform as soon as practicable. The Air Force said it would cease calling up reservists on a compelled basis.
Interrogators in the Nationalist Case.
_. r* * m M ■ dlflM fe" ■ A ¡, j I si Kk w * \ f iml A.S B . wBI Bfe v ■ " Bk E ■ wvB: : feag "i fe II .'I ' I -t /W v 1 , j j j r í' K- ' X s ¡' s' Á i '/¿ i 1 X jK JF \ 9 1 I/s' I t W v tí' o. ' ui 1 i ' 1 r BHr BwjBfe A *ABMS ' z tb. >WMiMBBF" ' w¿ JSB r B BAIf .- ',iBx. t /- -.
Im mouvc of having been seized by the Police several weapons in two automobiles that were part of the retinue accompanying the president of the NadonaUata Party, Mr. Podro Albin Cao
The police were being questioned by the Fiacal. From left to right: Ruth M. Reynold". Ana Rita Patán, Glady" Barbosa, Felipe Ramo" Día", Jota Cardona and Jota Mejíaa Floros. Loe fisealeo Angel Viera Mar-
on their return from a rally in Fajardo, laa penonaa traveling in eeoe automdvilee were questioned by the flaca! Here we see alfunaa from allae "to the San Juaa prosecutor's office, aiieatraa "apa*
ting" and William Charneco yesterday afternoon questioned numerous witnesses in connection with the case against the four accused" for carrying a gun". (EL MUNDO vote by Caeenave).
Weapons Seized from a Group Escorting Albizu
Bk y W--jL 1H fe - B B >4/ ■ ' f ve $B B ib <Bv íB : B9w
Ixm nationalists (from Isqulerda to right) Aatonlo Mnya Véles, Miguel Rosarlo Aulet, Rafad Burgos Fuente* and Eduardo Vásquez, were charged early yesterday morning by the Judge of the Night Court, da portación da armas prohibidas. They were given a bail of 11,000
11,000 bail to each of them. The weapons were seized by the police in two automobiles that were part of the retinue that accompanied the president of the Nationalist Party, Pedro Alhlzu Campos, to his delay in a rally in Fajardo.
Judge Roberts Imposes Life Sentences On Two For Some Time Since Federal Court Had Not Imposed Life Sentences By Ll IN SANCHEZ CAPPA EL MUNDO Staff Writer The imposition of life sentences, a common occurrence in the island courts, is something that had not been recorded in the Federal Court of Puerto Rico until yesterday, Friday. Judge Thomas H. Roberts, a federal judge, sentenced Pablo Santiago Nazario and Marcelino Navedo Santos, who pleaded guilty to second-degree murder, to prison for the rest of their natural lives. This sentence is one of the few of its kind imposed" in federal court, and so much so that the Court's" most senior* clerks* do not remember when a similar sentence was last imposed there. The case would have been more momentous "if the Acting Federal Judge, Francisco Ponsa Fellú, had not acquiesced to the defendants' plea of guilty to second-degree murder. The prosecution's charge of generic murder alleges facts* that could result in a guilty verdict of first-degree murder, with a death penalty sentence to be carried out in the state of Florida. The federal Criminal Code provides for capital punishment for a conviction* of first degree murder, but empowers juries* to prohibit the imposition of capital punishment when rendering a verdict such as this, which is mandatory for the Court. In this case the Court is required to impose a sentence of life imprisonment. In case of guilty verdicts (Continued on page 18, Col. 3)
Rio Piedras Judge Begins Issuing Arrest Warrants for Automobile Law Violators Now at Large, No Bail Appears By Ruríco ÉTrIVKRA EL MUNDO Staff Writer The First Section of the Rio Piedras Municipal Court of Puerto Rico, presided over by Judge Roberto Veray Torrcgrosa, began preparing yesterday the first twenty-five arrest warrants of the 800 summonses ordered by the judge upon taking office.
office. The said arrest warrants correspond to those cases where the bail documents required for the defendant or defendants to remain in provisional liberty do not appear in the file. Judge Veray Torregrosa announced upon taking office in the Municipal Court in Rio Piedras that he intended to "clean house" by "following the standard of action he set for himself in Arecibo, where he left the Court clean of backlogged cases. According to what Judge Veray revealed to EL MUNDO, the First Section Court officials began yesterday to prepare the arrest warrants for the first 25 defendants whose bail documents do not appear. The magistrate added that the warrants will be prepared little by little, due to the large number of cases and the shortage of personnel at the court. The arrests* will be carried out by the police" and the court's judges starting next week. First 25 Defendants* The names of the first 25 defendants against whom arrest warrants were ordered by Judge Veray Torregrosa. Pablo Centeno Castro, for Violation of Section 15 of the Regulations of the Public Ser\lclo Commission, which occurred in June 1950; Eduardo Quifto(Contlnued on page 18 Col, 6).
- 1 - ■ i a. - The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mat laño Villaronga, yesterday suspended from employment and salary s! School Superintendent" of Virques, Mr. José Rlvero Slcardó. Before* leaving on vacation for Europe, he admitted that he had formulated several charges to the superintendent Rlvero for "alleged" embezzlement", Irregularities in contract", and Immoral conduct," To another maeítro of Vleque" he gave him a severe reprimand, redentement" for operating a club of dubious morals, Villaronga took action in relation to other school superintendents implicated in various cases of administrative irregularities, El Caso do Vleque* Contra el Superintendente d" Escuela" d" Vieques el comidonado (Continued on page 18, Col, 4).
ludia Protests Tibet Invasion By Red China Nrhríi Summoned Cabinet To Discuss Situation. Pnr I) Penetration Continues. SHARMA NEW DELHI, Oct. 27. (PU) The Government of India protested to the Communist Government of China over its Invasion of Tibet and Prime Minister Pandit Nehru called an extraordinary session of the Cabinet to decide the course to be followed. The influential Statesman newspaper reported that Communist forces had penetrated 240 kilometers into Tibetan territory and that "reliable sources" said that these forces were 560 kilometers between Lhasa and the Yangtze River. The government instructed its ambassador in Pelpln to express to the Communist government "the displeasure and surprise" of the Indian government at the news that its armed forces are advancing on Tibet to "liberate" that ancient region. The 800-kilometer region mentioned above is a territory claimed by both the Tibetans and the Chinese Communists. The Tibetans sent a delegation to Pelpln to investigate the matter, but the Communists began marching on the "top of the world" before the arrival of the Mission. Radio reports that the Communists are only one day's march from Riowoche and it is believed that the Tibetans have concentrated 10,000 men of their best forces. The Statesman newspaper says that ins tlbetans are prepared to fight, but quo the "numerical superiority of the Communists, leaves no doubt as to the r-'-(Contlnún on It page 18, Col, 1)
Returning From a Meeting In Fajardo Car Crossed Red Light At Speed, Awakened Police Suspicions By ENRIQUE RAMÍREZ BRAU Editor of EL MUNDO While Pedro Albizu Campos and several of his companions were returning yesterday to the I A. M., in Fajarde, where they participated in ceremonies commemorating the birth of General Antenie Valero, hero of the Independence of Venezuela, the Secret Police arrested the occupants of one of the automobiles escorting the one in which the president of the Nationalist Party was traveling. The arrest was made at the Charneco site, stop 26, in Martin Peña. The Jii*z of In Corfn Nncfurns, IIcrnriaín Hrlford Torre", who at" 3 A. M. investigated rl raso, "ometldob pnr lnr" agents of the Negocíndn do Seguridad Interna, scu "ó n Antonio Moya Velez, Rafael Burgo" Fuente" and Eduardo 'Lopez Vazquez of Infraction to the Law of Carrying a Weapon", fixing a flnnzn ir $1,000 to each one. Also '1 judge charged Miguel Ro"". rio with infraction to articles" 15 and 16 of the Automobile Law" 279, fixing bail" of $200 in each case. Judge Torrea informed EL MUNDO that the first three were carrying a gun, one of which resembled a submachine gun. Also the" agent," according to the Judge, occupied "in a vehicle five bottles" that he did not (Continued on page 18, Col. 7), Plans Against Mongoose A method for the control of the mongoose or squirrel began to be discussed by the Veterinary Public Health Committee chaired by Dr. Guillermo Arbona and which includes employees of the Department of Health and the Department of Agriculture and Comcrcln. fl said committee met yesterday to discuss some problems", among them the main one, that of the mongoose. The meeting "lasted for more than an hour and discussed the planning of a program in the specific area where nine cases of rabies have appeared. The cases are located in the northeastern part of the center of the island. According to the discussion, the object is to draw up a permanent program for the vaccination of free-ranging dogs and vaccination of non-free-ranging dogs in the aforementioned sector, which is the one that has shown signs of rabies (Continued on page 18, Col. 2),