THE MONDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Medium cloudy with one" scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 81 degrees; low, "70 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.97 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Dec. 29 (PU). - In the afternoon today the" following temperatures were reported: New York, 40; Chicago, 28; Washington, 35; Miami, 79. Forecasts for tomorrow; scattered showers" and partly cloudy and cold. High temperature: 40.
DAILY MORNING
MORNING
THE FIRST NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered ao second ciaos matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 30, 1950
NUMBER 14246 FIRST EDITION
Governor Creates Island Civil Defense Office; To Be Headed By Wilson Colberg
Board To Request Price Freeze On Groceries. - Gov't Rations Cobalt Consumption WASHINGTON? Dec. 29 (PU) - The government today issued a strong order rationing cobalt, and officials said it will significantly affect the production of radios, television receivers and other household appliances. The order followed the revelation that the Economic Stabilization Agency - charged with keeping down the cost of living - will ask Congress for authority to freeze food prices at levels below those allowed under existing laws. At the same time, the Government's campaign to keep prices down by stepping up production received new impetus when it was revealed that commercial firms plan to spend a lot of money to expand their workshops and purchase new equipment. Under the new cobalt order, any purchase of more than 25 pounds will have to be approved by the Nado Production Authority, nal- including defense orders. Sourced from the Gongo The NPA will ration cobalt for the defense program and for "essential" civilian products. About 98 percent of the country's cobalt, which was not a problem in World War II, comes from the Belgian Congo Although the radio and television industries, which need cobalt for their magnetic parts, will be greatly affected by the order, officials say they will do everything in their power to keep the industry in operation in the event its productive capabilities are needed for the defense program. The news that Congress will be consulted to authorize a freeze on food prices below allowable levels came from PREPA sources. Under current law, food prices cannot be controlled unless they exceed the reasonable profit standard set by the Farm Bill. In addition, any order freezing food prices must take into account that processors must make a reasonable profit. With the exception of meat, food prices are below parity levels and any freeze order would have to be based on current or even higher levels. Underscoring the headaches of price stabilizers, government officials predicted today that consumers will pay $1.10 for the same quantities of food they got for a dollar in 1950. The order on cobalt was the second in as many days, completely controlling the "ca"|' stock" of a strategic material. Yesterday the Government assumed complete control of natural rubber purchases and will distribute the stocks among essential producers. As evidence of the growing tempo of the defense effort and (Continued on p. 16 Col. 6)
By executive order, the Governor yesterday established, attached to his office, an Office of Civil Defense; and appointed Colonel Wilson P. Colberg to head it. The Office of Civil Defense made preparations to protect the population against possible attacks and acts of sabotage by the enemy or agents of the enemy in cases of war. It will also prevent illegal price increases or hoarding of articles for speculative purposes. The Executive Order promulgated yesterday reads: "There is hereby established in the Office of the Governor an Office of Civil Defense for the purpose of organizing the civil defense of the population of Puerto Rico and ( carrying out the necessary preparations to protect the population against possible attacks, in case of war, by the enemy, direct sabotage by agents of the enemy, and indirectly by means of illegal price increases, hoarding of articles of any kind for speculative purposes, or any other forms, and against any other hostile action, or by fire, flood, earthquake, shortage or deficient distribution of supplies and materials, or other causes; and in order to ensure that the preparations of this Island are adequate to meet such disasters, and in general to provide for the common defense and to cooperate in the protection of order, health, and welfare of the people of this Island. protection of the * public order, health, and safety, . and the preservation of life and property in Puerto Rico, Colonel Wilson P. Colberg is hereby appointed as Special Assistant to the Governor, n charge of Civil Defense, and is hereby charged with the following; 1-Making the studies and pre(Continued on p. 16 Col. 7). 16 Col. 7) Call for Volunteers for 482nd Battalion The National Guard Public Relations Office announces that on Wednesday, January 3, at one o'clock in the afternoon, recruiting will begin to complete the 482nd Artillery Battalion of the National Guard which has been called into active federal service effective January 23, next. Persons interested in joining said unit should report at the date and time indicated, to Lieutenant Colonel Jacinto Hidalgo's headquarters where they will be interviewed by recruiting officers. Preference for entry into the 482nd will be given to World War II veterans who have experience in field artillery including radio operator drivers or who have knowledge of communications equipment (radio, telephone, etc.). Candidates must have at least a second year of high school or its equivalent and bring certificates of good conduct from the police or citizens of good moral character. War Tactics
Enemy" Force Dispersed In Manatee Sector
By RURICO E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO MANATI, December 29. (With the 296th Infantry Regiment on maneuvers in the vicinity of Manatí)-An "enemy" force estimated at one division, was surprised advancing in an easterly direction, with the intention of occupying San Juan. Their "Attempt" was frustrated by the prompt action of two battalions of the 296th Regiment, attached to the 106th Infantry Division of the United States. The 106th Division, composed of the 65th, 295th and 296th Infantry Regiments of Puerto Rico, began its early advance westward to destroy the advance of the "enemy" force and force a general retreat. The 296th Infantry Regiment, located on the right flank, had the mission of destroying the "aggressor" force east of the Manatí River, at the confluence north of the Salado channel. The advance of the "enemy" division, which came from Arecibo, was halted in the vicinity of Manatí, where it was discovered that advanced elements whose combat strength was estimated at one regiment.
The "enemy" division, which pro. eedla Arecibo, was detained in the vicinity of Manat! an between Barceloneta and the ...r. Guerrillas Y Tanks The intelligence service of the 106th U. S. Infantry Division had been aware of the presence of the "enemy" since Thursday. It was determined that the 296th Infantry Regiment, commanded by Colonel Juan Cesar Cordero Davlla, would be the one to mobilize to attack the "enemy" on the right flank. The First Battalion was sent, which went into action a few hours after leaving for the front. A guerrilla force of the "aggressor" forces began to harass them. The "enemy" increased their attacks and it was necessary to withdraw the First Battalion, which was replaced by the Third Battalion of the 296th Regiment, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Charlie Cuprlll. The "enemy" guerrillas continued to harass the Third Battalion but it had sufficient forces and was also supported by light tanks.
The Third Battalion occupied today, after several hours of fierce fighting, the "enemy" position Dos Colinas, and advanced between the Chavena swamp and Caño Hondo towards Cinco Colina, but could not continue its advance due to heavy "enemy" fire, maintained especially with automatic weapons and firing from Hill 42. The 1st Battalion was mercilessly attacked in the vicinity of a village where machine gun and heavy mortar nests were emplaced in the gardens of the houses. The conquest of the town took place after heavy fighting in which both sides "lost" many of their men. Barceloneta was reconquered The situation for the "enemy" began to get deadly when the 106th Infantry Division of the United States
The situation for the "enemy" began to turn deadly when the United States 106th Infantry Division continued its attack against the "invasion" force. The attack brought about the recapture of the town of Barceloneta, which in turn forced a general retreat of the "enemy". The Third Battalion of the 296th Regiment continued its cautious advance, protected by a smoke screen and supported by a close artillery attack. Occasionally it was harassed by scattered elements that in the form of guerrillas attacked the positions of the 296th Regiment. But they were eliminated due to the superiority of our troops and the modern weapons they had. Among these weapons were the automatic rifle and the 76-millimeter anti-tank gun. The final attack on Hill 42, where a large part of the force commanded by Major Rafael Rodriguez Erna and First Lieutenant Pedro J. Brass, Jr. was made at about noon today. (Continued on page 16 Col. 8)
Colonel Wilson P. Colberg. Chief of Civil Defenna in Puerto Rico. Muñoz Signs Lev Bill * - Antisubvcrsiva Another Prohibits Questioning Each Juror How He Voted Individually By Juan Martines Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO As of today, no person who belongs to a party, group, or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government by force or violence may be an employee or official of the Government. When a majority verdict is rendered in a criminal case, jurors will not have to individually report how they voted, according to another law passed yesterday by the Governor effective immediately. The Governor yesterday signed into law the following" bills passed by the eleventh special session of the Legislature: F. of S. 7 Act number 7. Repeals Section 290 of the Code of Criminal Procedure providing for the interrogation of jurors individually on the verdict. P. del S. 4 Law number 8. Declares it incompatible to be an officer or employee of the Government and to advocate the overthrow of the Government by force or violence or to be a member of organizations for that purpose. P. of the C. 10 Act Number 9. Provides that when a prisoner escapes he shall be punished by summary order of the District Court with imprisonment from 1 to 10 years" in addition to the penalty he is serving. P. S. 6 No. 10, Makes possible the use of federal funds appropriated in connection with the extension to Puerto Rico of various titles of the Federal Social Security Act. P. S. 5 and P. S. 6 Acts 355 and 356 establishing employment insurance in the sugar industry, amending the definition of the term so that instead of excluding employees whose compensation is more than 81,600 per year, executive, professional, supervisory (excluding foremen), administrative and clerical employees are excluded if such supervisory positions require work for at least 40 hours in each of the 52 weeks of the year.
Armed Force Magazine Praises the 65th
Korea Says Expertise Shown In Vieques Maneuvers Now Yields Dividends By WlIlamDORVILLTER WASHINGTON, Dec. 29 -(Special to THE WORLD) - "These men of the 65th are United States soldiers" in the most "beautiful" sense of the word. Ail said Armed Forre, a national military magazine that circulates weekly throughout the country, in one of its editorials in today's edition. The military magazine, highly respected in armed forces circles, devoted the lead editorial to the 65th Infantry's "operations in the important Portrex maneuvers" which took place on Vieque this year and said that the combative attitude demonstrated by the 65th in Operation Portrex "is paying rich dividends on the battle front". The editorial, under the title La Recompensa, says "Puerto Ricans are proud of "their combat regiment, and they have every reason to be. In a certain sense, there is a psychological compensation derived by the citizens of the "valiant" exploits of their compatriots in cold and distant Korea, which partially serves to cancel the unjust recriminations against them, as a people, for the "despicable and crazy" deeds of a handful of members of the "Puerto Rican Nationalist Party". The 65th Infantry "distinguished itself" in Korea, says Armed Force, "in and above and beyond the call of duty," participating in the hard-fought battle that preserved the Hungnam beachhead, "so that the forces" trapped in northeast ric Korea could be evacuated. Before the battle of Hungnam, (Continued on page 16 Coi. 6) Albizu Campos Accused Yesterday of Violating Law 53 New Indictment to be Read Wednesday Along with Twelve Nationalists The President of the Nationalist Party, Pedro Albizu Campos, will appear again at the San Juan Section of the District Court next Wednesday to hear the reading of a new indictment filed against him yesterday, for alleged Violation of the Law that cn "tlga subversive acts against the Government of Puerto Rico. The new accusation against the nationalist leader was filed by prosecutor José Dávlla Ortiz, before Judge Julio Suárez Garrlgn. The same prosecutor filed indictments for the same crime against Ruth Reynolds, Paulino Castro Abo* lafln, Ramón Medina Ramírez, Doria Tórresela Roura, Carmen María Pérez, Alvaro Rivera Walker. Juan José Muñoz Matos, Ullo Ramón del Rio Adames, Rafael A, Burgos Fuente", osé Mellas Flores, Eduardo López Vázquez, and Olga Isabel Vlscal Garrlga. Like Albizu Cnmpos, the other defendants are charged with having advised, preached and promoted the need to overthrow the Insular Government, the separation of the Island from the United States and the establishment of the Republic of Puerto Rico. Repeat Accusation Against Party President (Continued on pg. 16 Col. 2)
Communists Advance 10 Miles South of the Parallel and Launch Attacks on Allied Line
New York Speeds Up Plan For Defense Will Build Shelters At Cost Of $104,000,000 For One Million People NEW YORK, Dec. 29 - (PU)-City officials were anxious today to begin as soon as possible to build extensive shelters and subways, capable enough to house 1,000,000 residents!* Plans for reconstruction of the shelters, adjacent to the proposed" existing subway communication routes, were unveiled by the Transportation Board, which said construction of the $104,000,000 project could begin upon approval of a federal loan. The shelters could be used as protection against enemy bombs and also as a project that could be converted into subway garages and roadways when and if conditions permit. Senate and House conferees agreed yesterday in Wá "hlngton on lo" term" of civil defense legislation for the construction of lo" shelters in New York and other cities. The compromise bill will go before both houses early next week. Three general types of shelters were included in the city's plan. 1. 'Atomic bomb-proof shelters to be drilled' under solid rock. X' Shelters with "a substantial cover of rock and earth." but not absolutely bomb-proof. Fragment-proof" shelters" that would provide adequate protection against conventional" types of bombs. Shelter type* Shelters, which in some cases* would be nearly two miles long, would be divided into compartments 50 feet long. Bunk beds, adequate space for corridors with fluorescent lights as well as telephone communication and a loudspeaker system complete the internal arrangements. The Board explained that subway tunnels are considered bomb-proof if they are covered with 50 feet of solid earth or 25 feet of solid rock. Flood gates are planned for the subway tunnels and gables because a breach in one of the tunnels under the river could cause flooding in the subway track system. The Board said the plan has beennreceiveddfavorably by civil defense authorities in Wáshlngton. The city has a population of approximately 8,000,000. Although the proposed new shelters would reach only one person in eight, hundreds of thousands of others could seek refuge in the basements and crawl spaces of existing buildings as bomb shelters.
Board Increases Bank Reserves Order Will Affect Business and Personal Lending System WASHINGTON, Dec. 29,- (Pl¿L-The Federal Reserve Board increased its requirements for member banks in a move that will remove from circulation about $2,009,000,000 in potential lending funds. The" roBorvns represent a certain percent of the funds on deposit with the federal reserve banks. Since they must be on deposit with the twelve central federal reserve banks, they are not available for loans to businesses or individuals. The Board directed the Federal Reserve's central banks in the cities to increase their reserves by 23 percent of their net demand deposits by January 11, and said that another increase to 24 percent should be made by January 25. The bank's "pal" reserve should be increased by 13 percent in January 16, compared to 12 percent at present. Another increase to 14 percent will go into effect on February 1. SédHnbfa Anticipated The increase in ln" nacasídndc" (Continued on p. 16 Col. 4) 1
WH i k sr ■ ■ ■ H %"■■■■■ Lt. Gen. Mattew H. Ridgway, new head of the Eighth Army, talks with Maj. Gen. Doylo Illckcy (Left), deepuús <!" his arrival n Tokyo. Ridgway was appointed to command the Eighth Army when Lt. Gen. Walton H. Walker perished in an accident at Goren, when his ylp collided with a truck. (Photo I'A.) Teachers Association Declares Itself Incompatible With Nationalism Will Ask Instruction Not to Hire Group Affiliates. By" Benjamín - SANTA NA EL MUNDO Rodador Before closing its work last Thursday night, the Puerto Rico Teachers Association agreed to condemn the latest acts of terrorism that have occurred on the island. The assembly also agreed, with two dissenting votes, to "ollcl-
- The assembly also agreed, with silent votes against, to "request the Department of Instruction and other governmental and private agencies" not to hire teachers with nationalist or communist affiliation. A resolution adopted declared that membership in the Teachers' Association was incompatible with membership in these or similar ideological movements. Professor Díaz Cosme, from Canóvanas, and Professors González Guzmán and Ellas, from Rincón, argued against the resolution. Rlchatdson, vice-president; and Carmen Gómez Tejera, Narciso Costa Valdivieso and Agustín García Estrada, directors at-large. Terrorism Condemned In an extensive resolution submitted by numerous leaders of the Insular teachers, including President Virgilio Brunet, the Association condemned the acts of terrorism of the nationalists, alleging that these are in conflict with "the ideals of democracy" and with "the Puerto Rican way of life. After analyzing the situation that the island has been going through during the last few weeks, the Teachers Association approved the following in the aforementioned resolution: 1. To require all educational centers in Puerto Rico to fulfill their "inescapable obligation" to teach democratic concepts to students. 2. To require schools to teach facts and knowledge concerning the reality of communism, nationalism and other subversive movements. 3. "Being, as is necessary for the best possible education, that the student knows the" facts* and nc1 (Continued on pg. 16 Col. 3)
Defenders Retreat South Border Ridgway Expressed Confidence, After Touring Lines By RUTHEFORD POATS TOKYO, Sober, Dec. 30 (PU). - Advance troops of 250,000 Communist troops, preparing the way for an offensive against Seoul, marched Friday on the Munsan sector, a strategic rail and road junction 22 miles northwest of the capital. The "communist invs'í.rrc" of South Coren r>l rvanznron 10 miles south of Prralelo 38, on both" sides of the allied defense line. The" sharp" clash" along the 14" mile" fíenle" parcel "er the beginning of the" flnal preparations for Ja offensive long ago predicted by General Duuglts MacArthur's ruárteles. A powerful thrust against the eastern flank of the line, 25 to 30 miles inland from the Sea of Japan, forced a defensive unit to fall back to a point 10 miles south of the border. The" generals at MarArthur reported that the" communist" forces have between four and four thousand shoulder" in the Munsan area, a mile" south of Ho Imjin. rnwhere" Seoul's defense is anchored. The authorities said that the Munsan sector indicated a general fire, and that the enemy was on the west bank of the Jmjin, the point where it bends southward from the town. Fifteen miles northwest of Seoul's sensitive flank, a full Chinese division and at least two North Korean regiments were operating in and south of Kaesong, the first major South Korean town to fall to the Communists. Avlonea Attack Kaesong was a Hell of flames on Friday night, according to reports from the airmen who bombed the Communist concentration center. All along the front lo* American planes bombed Jn" (oncentraclonea communists for <1 expected flanking attack northeast of Ja city. Seoul police estimated that 900,000 of the city's 1,250,000 residents had fled south. On Friday night an Eighth Army officer said he had no reports from the eastern front on the condition of the "defending units" which had been "rcnlrgged by the communist attacks. It was believed that the" troops who had given ground were South Koreans, but the designation of units or nationalities was forbidden. t An American source in Seoul reported there that the Communists" had not broken through the line and had "oaten the attack on the eastern flank. The source said that the situation there was "not serious". The communist strategy of attacking Jo" flank" and concentrating security forces" on the eastern front followed the pattern of the ofen "Iva" that forced the" Allied* n to leave the v;>lie of the Yalu in October and abandon the line dej (Continued on p. 16 Col. 5)
K. ■,y ( ?< aer ' & v v v .y WWQllSM - *- *, ' - -Lv ¿2 / -> ", 4 /' ; v
Dot toldado* of the 296th Infantry Regiment crawl along the ground, while dot tanks also advance towards the enemy objective* I-" scene unfolded in the fields of Manatí during the* maneuvers held yesterday. The defensive forces were commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Charles Cuprlll and the aggressor forces by Lieutenant Colonel Charles Cuprlll.
aaa aggressor" by the first lieutenant Pedro Bru son, and as ota Mrvudor da ta operation of the enemy, acted the commander Rafael Rodrigue" Enui. Eate regiment is commanded by Colonel César Cordero Dávlla. (Photo el MUNDO, by Lula de Coaenave).