THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Medium cloudy with a few scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 87 degrees; low, 74 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 a.m., 39.99 inches of mercury.
NEW YOBB oepttember U. (FD). - The following temperatures were reported this afternoon: New York, 78; Chicago, 70; Washington, 74; Miami, 8L Forecasts for tomorrow on New York and neighboring cities: mostly fine and pleasant. Maximum temperature, 76.
.Vi'. THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Ratored na second ciaos matter. Post Otaca, San Juan. P. B
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1950
NUMBER 14142 FIVE CENTAVOS
INFANTRYMEN ADVANCE TO SEOUL
Island Will Not Be Affected by Control Over Steel Export Permit Does Not Apply Here There Are Sufficient Stocks of Construction Materials in Puerto Rico By 8. Gélvez Maturana. EL MUNDO Editor Immediately, Puerto Rico will not suffer the consequences of the federal control on steel production, which begins to be enforced in the United States on the 30th, according to what was informed yesterday by spokespersons of this industry in San Juan. Under the regulations issued by the National Production Authority, created by President Truman, steel exports to Latin American countries will be regulated in such a way that exporters will be required to obtain a special permit in Washington in order to ship outside the United States, and will be allowed to do so only when the special circumstances in each case make it advisable. It was reported yesterday in San Juan that, since Puerto Rico is considered a domestic market for these purposes under the regulations, it is not necessary to obtain such a permit, and therefore importers on the island will not be required to obtain one. However, since production will have to be distributed in quotas to the different countries, it is likely that shipments to Puerto Rico will suffer a small reduction. It was reported that, for the time being, the conitrucclóa industry in the páfs will not be affected, since there are sufficient stocks of rods, nails and other steel derivatives in the local market. It was indicated that eventually, the National Production Authority's program will only result in the reduction of the production of civilian consumer goods, such as automobiles and refrigerators. This view is supported by industry spokesmen on the island, since Informa's steel production has increased enormously in recent years and officials at the helm of the new agency believe that the needs of the domestic front can continue to be met, even if tanks and guns are given priority. Government officials and leading figures in the Island's construction industry had expressed concern about the extension to the Island of controls on products from the U.S. steel industry. Had these controls been extended to Puerto Rico, the construction program of homes, roads, bridges, public works and private housing developments that has been developing in the country would have faced serious difficulties to continue its progressive pace. During the past month, 2,576 tons of steel rods for construction of different sizes and 1,102 quintals of nails and screws were received on the island. It was reported that although statistics for this month are not available, imports for the month of September should equal, and probably surpass, those of last month.
The arrows indicate the sites on the South Korean coast where the Allies made their landings early Friday morning (Korean time). The first landing was made by the Marine Corps at Inchon, port city of Seoul, capital of South Korea, now in Red hands. The second landing was carried out at
Villaronga Will Go By Surprise To Districts Wants To Avoid Lavish Reception In Bus Visits To Know Situation The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villaronga, has initiated a series of personal visits to all the school districts of the Island, The idea is, he said, to know personally the problems and needs of each district, and to hear the suggestions that the superintendents, principals and teachers of schools want to make to him. Commissioner Villaronga will make these visits unannounced, to avoid banquets and lavish receptions. He said that his interest is to help superintendents, principals and teachers in their school work and to gather data on the ground to see how he can help correct any deficiencies that are pointed out. The Commissioner of Instruction (Continued on pg. 16 Col, 5)
The Commissioner of Instruction (Continued on pg. 16 Col, 5). 4 Phillip Torres, 22 years of age, a native of San Juan, son of Police Sergeant Felipe Torres, stationed in Bayamon, was seriously wounded in Korea, according to a cablegram received by his sister Carmen Torres de Holder, a resident of Rusk County, Texas. After Carmen received the telegram from the Secretary of the Army, she received another one indicating that the wound received by her brother was not serious. The Adjutant General of the Army, Major Edward F. Wltsell, also informed Mrs. Carmen Torres that her brother Phll Torres was improving from the wounds he received on the battlefield. t Police Sergeant Felipe Torres, who had served under Captain Guillermo Sol-
11 , _¿° l< " ÑÓRTH NC " N " Honflsong . SOUTH S j, . JO' i. V^ yon9 A vi UffiyonflJ PopjongpoF*> 3 wang|u r N* V "PUSAN TSUSHIMA Halt w 9 JS
tégiea bridgehead. The third landing was made by South Korean troops north of Pohang, near the sector where the Reds made their fiercest attacks last week. (Photo P. A.)
Felipe Torres, a young man from San Juan, was wounded and convalesced in Tokyo. Father Comments
l'ur ENRIQUE RAMIREZ BRAU Editor of EL MUNDO 4 "J'f, 1 * 1 ?* who arrived in Korea with the First Cavalry Division, and participated in 28 combats, after being wounded and spending his convalescence in Tokyo, returned to the battlefield. He was decorated.
He was decorated, returned to Bayamon, a former member of the 65th Infantry Regiment, to which he served for seven years, and received the reports from Adjutant General Edward F. Witsell and the Secretary of the Army, with considerable delay, as these reports were sent to his daughter in Texas. Phillip Torres graduated from high school in Aguadilla and attended classes at the University of Puerto Rico for six months, after which he dropped out of school. He shipped out soon after to New York and from there he went to his sister Carmen Torres' home in Texas. She enrolled him in a college for two years, where he studied psychology. From Texas he went to Kansas to take a military course. Then he went to Virginia, where he joined the Army. Sent to California, he shipped to Japan with the 1st Cavalry Division. Sixteen months ago he entered the Regular Army of the United States. From Japan, one fine day, he left with his troops for Korea. He was the first Puerto Rican soldier to set foot on Korean soil. He is stenographer Felipe Torres, known as Phillip, is a stenographer, and while in the U.S. military, he played (Continued on page 16 Col. 4) "
By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor of EL MUNDO Disagreements between the two unions of Puerto Rican longshoremen are threatening to degenerate into a strike at the gates of the island, according to authoritative sources revealed yesterday, intimately connected with the collective negotiations that have been taking place between the shipping companies and the dock workers. For some days now, these collective negotiations have been practically at a standstill, mainly due to an old jurisdictional dispute between Council Number 1 and Council Number 3 of the International Longshoremen's Association (ILA), as reported. The information given exclusively yesterday to EL MUNDO indicates that both councils are engaged in a fight for the protection of the ILA.
Penetrated Oh and a Half From Inchon Second Offensive By Naktong River Forces 2nd Division Preceded By Tanks Attack On This Front By FRANK TREMAINE TOKYO, Saturday, Sept. 16 (P. U.)-Marines landed on the beaches of the Naktong River. Tanks hit the beaches of Inchon, on the west coast of Korea, on the second day of a triple amphibious landing which, according to General Douglas MaoArthur, is aimed at annihilating the North Korean Communist armies between two giant millstones. The tanks followed the first assault by the Marines, who had managed to advance a mile and a half into the heart of Inchon during the first thirty minutes of the attack. A second tip of the Marines' tanks advanced toward Seoul, 18 miles to the east, and the former South Korean capital. East, and former South Korean capital abandoned to the Reds on June 28. The Marine forces include veterans of the Korean war, who were fighting lately on the Nak. tong River, south of Taegu, as well as other fresh units just arrived from the United States. (In Washington, a Defense Department spokesman reported that MacArthur had been notified that "the entire operation is proceeding according to plan." The spokesman said the force meanwhile included a Marine division, an Army division and other troops)/ TOKYO, tobado, Sept. 16, (FU)- U.S. forces today tightened their oa> gating strike of their one-two strike against the Korean communletu ñor. In a perfectly coordinated general attack with the amphibious assault of the Tenth Army Corps in Inchon and Seoul to the north, American troops moved from the line on the Korean beachhead to retaliate for part of the giant "grindstone" offensive. The Americans began to close the southern half of their pincers shortly after dawn, when troops of the U.S. First Cavalry Division and Second Division launched a general offensive against the Reds. Troops of the First Cavalry Division were thrown against the Communist lines, encased by new American tanks, eight miles north of Taegu. At the same time, U.S. Second Division troops were charging hard against the enemy all along the Naktong River front. (Continued on page 15 Col. 3) Coffee Prices Effective Today Yesterday was drafted, to be released to the public today, Administrative Order No. 209 of the General Supply Agency, which fixes maximum prices and contains other provisions regarding the sale of coffee in Puerto Rico. As announced yesterday in this newspaper, the price to be paid by the consumer as of 1:01 p.m. this afternoon per pound of coffee will be 74 cents, roasted and ground. The order is signed by the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, Mr. Ramón Colón Torres, and in his explanatory memorandum he states the following (Continued on page 18 Col. 3)
Dispute ¿ 2 Unions Threaten to Create a Strike at the Docks
The two unions, both having appealed to the National Labor Relations Board with petitions for "lessons in representation. The National Labor Relations Board officially reported that recently Council Number 3, chaired by Ramon Gorj, filed a petition for representation, covering all longshoremen from all shipping companies at the port of San Juan. For his part, Council number 3, chaired by Mr. Eusebio G. Moreno, made the same request for the repre- : ciation of all the longshoremen of all the shipping companies in the port of San Juan. Moreno, made the same request for the stevedores of the ports of Ponce and Mayagüez. V v As you know, the Guardians' Union and the Dock Employees' Union have been negotiating with the Port of Ponce and the Port of Mayagüez for the same reason.
MacArthur Optimistic After Invasion
Hopes to Cut Red Supplies. General Douglas MacArthur said today that the landing here is aimed at trapping the communiataa between the anvil and the hammer of Allied power and cutting them off from the municlonea. The Supreme Allied Commander came here with the invading* Army and Mari* na Infantry nut to supervla*ate the amphibious attack. He went around the landing zone in a small boat, passing very close to a beach before the invaders landed. If the landing is successful, the enemy will be caught between the Allied spearhead in the Inchon-Seoul area and the growing beachhead around Pusen. -He will be subject to the duplicate combat strength of both forces, operating in cooperation, and I will be deprived of his reinforcements and supplies," MacArthur told the accompanying corres*pondents. "If we can accomplish this, the (Communist) forces will sooner or later get the upper hand and stop op* erating in a coordinated fashion," the five-star general declared. Reds Have More MacArthur admitted that the North Americans have numerical superiority over the Allies, but said the Reds' lack of naval air power cancels the advantage. "Their (eneml* go's) ground forces give them the Initiative, but we are going to wrest the initiative from them by taking advantage of our two components (Continued on pg. 16 Col. S) Muñoz Issues Convocatoria A Las Cámaras Entre Otro! Governor Luis Muñoz Marín yesterday issued a proclamation summoning the Legislature to an extraordinary session for next Monday, the 18th, at 10:00 a.m. Six matters are included in the call. Six matters are included in the call, the first and foremost being the extension to Puerto Rico of the provisions of Title II of the Social Security Act of the U.S. Congress. The text of the call issued yesterday by the Governor is as follows: "Whereas, there are several important matters of public interest which require action by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, "Therefore, I, Luis Muñoz Marín, Governor of Puerto Rico, in accordance with the provisions of law in force, hereby summon the members of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico to a special session of said Legislative Assembly to commence on Monday, September 18, 1950, at 10:00 A. M., in the Capitol of Puerto Rico at 10:00 A. M., on Monday, September 18, 1950, at 10:00 A. M., at 10:00 A. M., in the Capitol of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico, in accordance with the provisions of law in force. To extend to Puerto Rico the provisions of Title II of the Social Security Act of the Congress of the United States of America. To allocate the necessary funds for the continuation of the work of scientific appraisal. To amend Act 248 of May 8, 1950, which orders the construction of a wall and other protective facilities in the town of Luquillo. 4. To amend Article 3 of Act 55 of May 13, 1933, as amended. 5. To amend the Lands Law to empower the Lands Authority to subscribe, acquire, possess, (Continued on page 16 Coi. 3) 1 - - - -- -- -- --
■■ ■ ■ J i Ir Jl General Douglas MacArthur, confident of triumph after Invasion.
Governor Signs Anti-Harassment Measure Into Law Also Bill To Facilitate Operation Of Driver's Insurance - One Bill Received Veto By JUAN MARTINEZ CHAPEL * Editor of EL MUNDO Yesterday the Governor signed into law House Bills 16 and 6, which are now House Bills 31 and 33 respectively of the sixth extraordinary session ended a few days ago. ♦ - ■
With this action the Executive put an end to the consideration of bills approved in that session, which reached the number of 33, of which only one received a pocket veto. The bill that did not become law had to do with reorganization plans and suffered from a drafting defect that caused it to remain without becoming law. Supply Law Bill 31, signed into law yesterday, amends the Supply Law, putting teeth into it so that serious penalties may be imposed on those who hoard basic necessities. Act 33 amends the Driver's Insurance Law by broadening the terms "driver" and "employer". It exempts from sickness benefits the driver who voluntarily causes or prolongs his illness. Provides that the $500 death insurance shall be paid in one lump sum and not in weekly payments. Clarifies that the beneficiaries of the life insurance are the persons who depended for their total or partial subsistence on the driver's income at the time of his death. Entitles drivers covered by the law to nine days of paid sick leave. Exchange of Impressions The Governor, before signing the driver's insurance bill, exchanged impressions with the legislative leaders so that in the next ordinary session it may be amended by eliminating the fee charged for the renewal of licenses, which is paid into the insurance fund. In this regard, the following press release was given to the press in Fortaleza: . r The Governor signed today P. of the C. No. 6, Law 32, of the last legislative session. The new law will be passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Bill Proposed For Island Sugar Industry Muñoz To Extend Veterans' Laws To Boricuas In Korea By Juan Martine" Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer In the extraordinary session that will begin on Monday, the bill that amends the law that converts the sugar mills into public service entities, which is ineffective after the interpretation given to it by the competent courts, will not be discussed. A group of legislative leaders has been meeting periodically with sugarcane growers and other persons interested in the matter, and they have not yet reached an agreement as to the wording of the bill to be submitted to the Legislature. However, this matter will be considered in an extraordinary session to be called for next December, according to what was said yesterday in Fortaleza. It was also learned in Fortaleza that (Continued on page 16 Col. 2)
Personality Study of Female Students in UPR Residence Halls ' ' ' < -
The University of Puerto Rico will study various aspects of the personality of the students who live in the residence halls of the University of Puerto Rico. Included in the study are the manners, dress and grooming of the resident students. This study will be one of the aspects of the recreational program organized at the UPR to be developed in the residence halls, and may be extended to other residence halls. To direct the program, Mrs. AliI <la Iglesia de Rivera Barreras, graduate in Home Economics at the UPR, has been appointed. Home Economics at the UPR. ¥ The social activities include such aspects as the organization of small libraries in the residences and the orientation of study books, use of dictionaries and reference books. To this end, Mr. Thomas Hayes
Thomas Hayes, UPR librarian, has prepared a minimum list of books and magazines. He also plans to offer the residents lectures on how to purchase and evaluate quality. They will also be offered an elementary course in sewing, decorating and cooking. According to the information provided, Mrs. Iglesia do Rivera Barreras will organize clubs for various sports and recreational activities, such as movies, ballroom dancing, painting classes, gardening, photography and parlor games. In conjunction with the program, I will develop a program of nutrition posters. A choral group will also be organized among the students. (Continued on page 16, Col. 1)
Partial view of the port of Inchón, where the Marines entered.
Í - _ ' ■ VYV** - ■■■■' YV V' :i $ ■- -' ..' j .'- Y i' Y j :: - ■ ■ ■ ■' . ■ < ■ A B w|"f -'-' * *' K , " -?w i-wAta-JS ;; |g||Í||Í|||m TBMtWMbí:. r Mv
This is a view of Inchon, the port city of Sed!, the capital of South Korea, which fell to the Communists in the early days of the Red invasion. The Marines made a surprise landing at this port in the early hours of Friday morning, thus including the "open offer of the Reds".
The Marines made a surprise landing at this port early Friday morning, thus cutting off the Allied "opening of the Allied offensive, which would encircle the North Korean troops between two fires, and force them to fight on two separate fronts. The Marines immediately moved inland, establishing a beachhead. (Photo by P. A.)