THE MpNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Generally cloudy with showers during the day, becoming partly cloudy with isolated showers at night. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, M degrees; low, 74 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, - tea 4:10 p.m., ISA7 inch* of mercury. No tropical disturbance in the eastern Caribbean Sea.
NEW YORK, Aug "to lá (PU). - The following temperatures were reported this afternoon: New York, 8|; Chicago, U; Wahlngton, 77; Miami, 89. Predictions for* m*ft*n* in New York and cities veeims: clear" hot and humid, ta tampershira má" high korea da 85. o
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
AKO XXXI
I as second cines matter. Otilen, San Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY AUGUST 19, 1950
NUMBER 14115
FIVE CENTS
Americans Halt Attack on Taegú; Achieve Resounding Triumph at Changnyong
First Group of 38 sworn in. Volunteers To Swell Ranks Of 65th Regiment Another Hundred Reservists Called Up, For Grand Grand Total Of 1640 Thursday night the first 38 volunteers who applied to join the 65th Infantry Regiment were sworn in. -The ceremony was held at the Ruchanan Recruiting Center. The group was immediately mustered into the ranks of the First Battalion at the fort. Captain Octavio Aymat, officer of the Receiving Center, was in charge of the oath-taking ceremony, Colonel Arthur E. Solem, commanding officer of Fort Buchanan, being present. The second group of volunteers was expected to be sworn in yesterday during the late afternoon, but the total number of this second group was not known. Mata do Juramentado* . An Army spokesman reported that there are countless volunteers awaiting the final requirements for acceptance, o<rsment or official induction into the 65th Infantry Regiment. Many are pending reports requested from Police Headquarters. The following is the list of the group of 38 volunteers who were sworn in o Jesús Concepción Vélet, Sixto Morcado Ortiz, Enrique Noriega Rivera, Luis Esteban Butter Decodet, Carmelo Pifieiro Tuflno. Rogelio Torres Casiano, Pedro Villegas Córdova, Isabelo Garda Colón, Arnaldo Claudio, Israel Vargas Vargas. Roberto Mercado Rodríguez, Domingo Fuentes Diaz, Harold Aguedo Capostany Verdejo, Francisco Rodrl. guez Laboy, Gabriel Roche Santiago, Eladio Torres Ramos, Raúl Rodrigues Rivera, Julio Batista Gar. cía. Absalón Berrios Huertas, Ricardo Fúster, Abríham Pérez Albaladejo, José Vélez Vázquez. Hlglnlo Martínez Sulsona. Manuel Castro Dones, Agustín Rodríguez Ro. aarlo, Ignacio Rodríguez Rivera, Eduardo Emilio Vlllafafle Rosado, Pablo Rivera Cruz, Miguel Torres Poveda, Emilio Brito Martinez, GulMermo Rodrigues Losada, José An. tonto Carro, Juan Díaz Ventura, Julio Luis Figueroa Mitehell. Manuel Laboy López, oJaquín Navedo García. Pablo Requena López £ Héctor Soto Almodóvar, Llaman Cien Más . One hundred more reservists were lia. mated yesterday to active military service, to complete the 65th Infantry Regiment, Army Headquarters in San Juan announced. This makes a total of nine hundred reservists, a large number of them married with dependents, called to active duty during the past two days. The Army released the complete list, by towns, of all these reservists called to fl- < Continued on page 16, Col. 3) Raymond Hilliard To Arrive Monday Dr. Raymond M. Hilliard. Commissioner of Public Welfare of New York, will arrive in San Juan next Monday, at 6:17 o'clock in the morning, on PAA flight 215, according to a note from Fortaleza. / He will be a guest of the Governor /during the week he spent on the Island, and on Monday the latter will offer him a luncheon to which the following have been invited: The Commissioner of Labor, Soflor Fernando Sierra Bordéela; the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Pona; the Director of Public Welfare, Mrs. Celestina Z. do Goodsald; the Director of the Budget Bureau, Mr. Roberto de Jesús. Other Guests, also the Director of the Compafila do Fomento, Mr. Teodoro Moscoso, Jr.; Rector Jaime Benitez; Francisco Arrillaga, President of the Board of Commissioners of the Capital; Senate President Samuel R. Quiñones; Executive Secretary Roberto Sánchez Vilolla; Senator Victor Gutiérrez Franqul; and Softer Fred Weil. Dr. Hilliard, who is mu. Interested in the problems of the Borieuaa in New York City, will confer with several Government officials and observe at the pals several of their problems. (Continued on p. 20 col. 1)
Fernando Sierra Bordéela, in the* investigation he made in the field. It has also been reported by the state's press in the city of Bay City. Poor conditions of housing, food, pay and treatment, resulting from several flagrant violations of a labor contract sanctioned by the Department of Labor and offering full guarantees to the workers, have been revealed to this newspaper. Authoritative reports indicate that some of the violations of the contract have been admitted by setter Max Henderson, representative of the Michigan Field Crops, in correspondence with Commissioner Sierra. The former admitted the inconvenience to the Michigan Field Crops of complying with all the provisions of the contract, which he considers "a failure and an embarrassment to the workers and to the Commissioner of Labor himself, who was surprised in his good faith by approving a contract which would not be enforced in Michigan." Such has been Commissioner Sierra's indignation when confronted with violations of the contract by Michigan farmers, and the deplorable living and working conditions he has seen in Michigan, that he has refused to enter into arrangements to have the remaining Michigan laborers work in the coming beet crop there. First, Commissioner Sierra Bordéete's inquiries revoked the workers being brought to Michigan late (Continued on page 16, Col. 1).
The Senate postponed until the Governor officially submits it, the consideration of the problem of the Puerto Rican workers who are in Michigan prevented from returning to Puerto Rico due to alleged breach of contract by the farmers for whom they work. Senator Celestino Triarte made a motion that the Senate request the Governor to send him the report that has been submitted by Labor Commissioner Sierra Bordela regarding his investigation of the living and working conditions of the workers.
War Operations South Korea ; V /"N|e*one W (SOUTH % A "*"e -- - T" n V*L**^*"3" M "i ¡kit ' ¿^j^sR^***** Jr J] ""ThJTnM" rww - * Ó ' id* - J 9 tTATUTI MILIS 50 ta big black arrow (!) seftate the area between Waagwan and Kunwl where the North Koreans are making their way toward Taegú. Three Red divisions were approaching the city on August 17. At Changyong (8), the Reds and the Americans engaged in one of the most fierce battles of the war. In the Chlnjú sector (8) the American forces abandoned the Chinjú-Sachon area (solid line) to take up new positions (jagged line), and are on the alert for the possible push of the North Koreans towards Pusan. He believes that the communists are regaining their forces in the Pohang area. The situation of the Boricua workers in Michigan is considered serious by EL MUNDO Editor The seriousness of the situation of the workers who are still in Michigan where they went to work in the remote farms was revealed yesterday to EL MUNDO, with details and proofs. This situation was verified by the Commissioner of Labor, who was
"After an extensive discussion between prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez and attorneys Rafael Rivera Zayas and Bonlcio Sanchez Castalio, Judge Julio Suarez Garriga, of the San Juan Section of the District Court of Puerto Rico, yesterday postponed to August 29 the trial of Lucas Castro Angulta, who is charged with eight counts of murder and two counts of attempt on his life. In requesting the postponement of the trial, which was scheduled for next Tuesday, the defendant's lawyers alleged that they needed to see and study the radons offered in the trials. 1 radons offered in the trials 1 against Miguel Cirilo Batalla and Mi1 guel Angel Palou, both already convicted for the same facts imputed to Castro Angulta. Last Suspension The accusations against Castro Angulta arose as consecuen. ' ela of the fire at the Palou do San Juan warehouses, where perede- ' ron in December of last alte ' eight persons, and two others estu. The company's employees were at risk of death. By agreeing to make a new se- (Continued on Page 21-Col. 5)
Senate Postpones Consideration Of Michigan Laborers Case
the means to remedy such a situation in the future. Majority Leader, Senator Victor Gutierrez Franqul, suggested that such action be postponed because he is aware that the Governor has officially submitted the matter to the Senate in an extended or possible reconvening of the current legislative session. He further stated that he was confident that by submitting the issue to the Senate, the Governor would recommend such legislation as may be necessary to resolve any deficiencies that may exist. The Senate agreed to postpone the action requested by Senator Triarte in view of Senator Gutierrez Franqul.
The Houses Pass Referendum Measure Amendment Requires Birth Certificate Senators Carrasquillo And Rivera Colón Object To Require Ortificate By 8. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor of EL MUNDO The Senate approved early yesterday morning S. 10, to implement Act 600 of Congress, in connection with the establishment of a constitutional government on the Island. The House approved the same bill yesterday at one o'clock in the afternoon. Among the amendments approved and already published previously in yesterday's edition, is the change in the dates for the three votes to be held: Saturday, November 4, and Sunday, November 5, registration of all citizens who did not vote in the 1948 election. Monday, June 4, 1951. referendum to determine whether or not the voters therein accept the Act of Congress referred to, Monday, August 27, 1951, election of the members of the Constituent as determined by said Act of Congress. Monday, January 21, 1952. referendum to determine whether the People of Puerto Rico approve or reject the Constitution drafted by the Constituent Convention. Objeten Enasten The amendment most discussed by the Senate was one by addition, establishing the presentation of a certificate of the Demographic Registry or Baptismal Certificate, to every citizen who goes to the schools to register. Senators Heracllo H. Rivera Colón and Ernesto Carrasquillo objected to the approval of an amendment in such sense, submitted by the Joint Committee. Senator Carrasquillo stated that up to now, the current Electoral Law, which does not provide anything in that sense, has given magnificent results and said that it does not see the need to overload the work of the different leaders and political committees, having to go to the Demographic Registry to obtain a certificate of each one of their future voters. Heracllo Rivera Colón also opposed it, saying that this would multiply the work, and he extended in considerations on the impropriety of such disposition that will cause serious impediments, according to him, to the people who wish to vote, and he mentioned that the voter should be accustomed to comply with his civic duties with determination and seriousness, without the need of forcing him to present irrefutable proof on things" such as his age, etc. and that what the bill should provide for was that he who made a false statement should be thrown in jail "until he rots," in order to chastise him for the crime of "falsehood. 3) Defendant William Busher Rivera, who is apparently disturbed in his mental faculties, caused hilarity among the public in the courtroom presided over by Judge Julio Suiroa Garriga, of San Juan, when he appeared in court with his face painted and his legs bare. After entering the courtroom, Busher Rivera refused to sit down, and the bailiff had to struggle with him to force him to occupy the seat he was sitting in. In view of the defendant's attitude, the magistrate ordered him to be admitted to the Psychiatric Hospital for examination and ordered the suspension of his sentence. Busher Rivera is accused of having assaulted Agustín Cotto Crus with José Blas Valeáresl and Julio Olmo Geliborty, who was robbed of 1504 pesos and a watch valued at 160 pesos. The facts, according to Is seuss* eion, took place in the Río Piedras area one of the gods (continued on page 16, Col. 8).
XulMK¿, ' ,¿jr *W 3#m. éwj>" ■. . ■ JIM " BMlgWIR /"■■ ',-' H>.' ■■$<**.".■ - . ♦ - ■ : ■\ 7 ■ ,./- 7774? ■ ;z 4 *** ■'''"S>\MW fc-'v - , ■■*■"* vfehMtek. '? -^"\k " w ** un/'? 1 3*&4
A North Korean tank crewman lies dead next to the red tank that was destroyed at Indong, north of Waegwan, during an attack by the Koreans. The photograph was taken on Sunday, pz.
The photograph was taken on Sunday, by a photographer from the South Korean Army's First Division of the Army of I* i South Korea, (Photo by Associated Press),
Muñoz Gathered Sugar Growers In Fortaleza Coordinate Action To Raise Situation To Congressional Committee By BENJAMIN SANTANA EL MUNDO Staff Writer Yesterday an important meeting was held in Fortaleza, convened by the Governor, with the directors of the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association. The meeting was also attended by the Resident Commissioner, Dr. A. Fernós Isern, who, together with Governor Muftoz Marín, is taking steps to have the restrictions on late sugar eliminated. Mr. E. F. Rice, administrator of the Central Aguirre Sugar Company and president of the Sugar Producers Association, commented that Puerto Rico is the only area in the world with restrictions of this kind. The meeting was also attended by Mr. Juan B. Garda Méndez, Mr. Secundlno Lozana, Mr. Rafael Domínguez and Mr. Manuel del Valle, who is the administrator of Eastern Sugar. Mr. Miguel Angel Garda Méndez excused himself from attending the meeting due to prior commitments he had in Mayaguez, which he said he could not postpone. The purpose of yesterday's meeting, as reported, was to coordinate a common action on what to do about the sugar problem, so that when the Agriculture Committee of the National Chamber comes to the island in November 10, a good approach to the situation will be made. The sugar leaders will insist that the restrictions be eliminated when the new sugar law is drafted, and that the new law be approved by the National Chamber of Agriculture.
Four Nations Already Ready to Dispatch Troops for Korea United Ekladox* Accepted Offer <ic Great Britain, A "í As of Turkey, Australia and New Zealand For JAMES E. ROPER WASHINGTON, Aug. 18. (PU)- Esladni United States formally coupled Ja offer of four members of the United Nations", to send ground troops totaling about a Division, to reinforce
the crowded North American forces in (teres. Turkey will send 4,500 men, and Britain, Australia and New Zealand will provide combat units of unannounced size. The combined strength of these three Commonwealth forces was estimated at about 7,500 men. This country, acting on behalf of the United Nations, accepted early this week the offer of Siam to send 4,000 men and of the Philippines, 5,000 men. General Douglas MacArthur, as commander of the United Nations in the war, recently appealed to the other members of the United Nations to send ground troops "without delay". In unveiling these latest acceptances, the State Department proclaimed all these other offers as concrete, concrete contributions to stop Communist aggression and restore world peace. U.S. officials are happy to receive contributions from European and Far East countries for diplomatic reasons, as well as military and civilian ones. The ground troops will provide much-needed reinforcements for MacArthur's command, while giving a dramatic lie to Russia's propaganda claiming that America is fighting a war "of Empire" (Continued on page 16, Col. 8).
Muñoz Submits Nominations Before Senate Current Carolina Judge A. Rodríguez Encobar Was Included in List Governor Lute Muñoz Marín yesterday submitted to the Insular Senate the appointment of Angel Rodríguez Escobar, as Judge of the Municipal Court of Puerto Rico, and those of other officials. This was *1 magistrsdo held in office last week, by the Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, after rejecting several charges made to the Judge by the Mayor, the Municipal Assembly and the Popular Committee of Carolina. Mayor Federico Cordero complained to the Department of Justice that Judge Rodriguez Escobar had intervened "in a partial manner and demonstrating a marked favoritism towards one of the parties involved in the matter", in a dispute of collindancla". Also accusing him of "excessive penalties and strong punishments", the Municipal Assembly and the Popular Municipal Committee of Carolina approved resolutions against Judge Rodriguez Escobar and requesting his transfer from Carolina, where he has been acting temporarily. Upon investigation of the case by the Court Administrator, Angel Vázquez Tébar, the results of the charges were found to be empty of evidence, and it was determined that Judge Rodríguez Escobar has always complied with his duty. The report ended by stating that this magistrate "has a clean record of service and enjoys the full confidence of this Department, having demonstrated to date that he has been a probity official, honest and zealous in the fulfillment of his duties". Other* Appointment* Other appointments submitted to the Senate yesterday, by the Governor, (Continued on page 16, Col. 8)
1 '' '' ' me a - w A I I 11 William Buacher Rivera who, m alleges, has impaired* au* facultadea móntale*, ea guarded by two bailiffs as he appeared yesterday before one of the *rooms* of the District Court, on Ran Juan, to answer to a charge of robbery. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
Senator Juan Dávila Díaz, in statements to EL MUNDO yesterday, said that he had not made any commitment with the Governor, nor was there any agreement in which he would come in relation to the matter of the Police Investigation. The Senator referred to the delivery of the information that deals with "a commitment of the Governor with the members of the Senate Police Committee not to make statements to the press regarding the matter". Dávila Díaz said that the only talks he has had with the Governor have been about sugar problems and that "he knows absolutely nothing about the agreements with the Governor".
South Koreans Recapture Pohang Horrible Slaughter In Naktong River Reds Retreat Fifteen Miles From Capital City. Fighting at Kigye By FRANK TREMAINE TOKYO, Saturday, October 19. (PU) - The United Nations forces, in a double victory, repulsed the North Korean offensive against Taegu and almost eliminated the dangerous bridgehead on the Naktong river cut to the southwest, dispatches received from the front said today. The American and I," South Korean infantry, supported by a fleet of new Pershing tanks, artillery and planes, stopped 1* Communist march on Taegu at a point only 12 miles north rl" of the city, and drove the enemy back two" or three miles. U.S. Marines and infantry troops destroyed the North Korean Fourth Division, which held the bridgehead. The North Koreans" fled in panic down the river before the coordinated attack by infantry, artillery and aircraft. Fifteen hundred communists were killed in two days. This morning there remained, on the east bank of the river about 30 miles southwest of Taegu, only a small pocket, which was being eliminated. On the east coast, the Pohang airfield was being used in emergency by American planes after being recaptured by the South Koreans along with the cities of Pohang and Kigye, 8 miles to the northeast. In recent dispatches, only one enemy attack has been reported - a breakthrough by 1,000 communists, containing the new defense line of the Kean fighting force, just west of Masan, on the south coast. The "communists" invaded the forward positions of two North American regiments, but were repulsed with heavy losses in the "counterattack". The North Korean threat against Taegou was so serious yesterday that the city, the temporary capital of the Republic of Korea, was ordered to evacuate civilians. Part of the government, and the American ambassador, John J. Muerto, left for Pusan, on the southeastern coast. The city was so overcrowded with refugees that its population was estimated at 800,000. While they were on their way to the ur, the South Korean First Division launched a counterattack against the Communists, whose tankheads were only about 12 miles north of the city. General Douglas MacArthur reported in his Korean communiqué number 272, issued at 12:20 A. M'< today (10:20 A. M. Friday), that the South Korean First Division had regained half of all the ground it had lost to the Communists. Dispatches from the front said the Americans and South Koreans had driven the Reds back three miles. They said they had blunted, at least, the great enemy threat against Taegou. But MacArthur's general quartet officers here said the attack could be resumed at any moment. The enemy is regrouping his divisions - possibly six, with a total of 80,000 men - on the Taegú front, and still seems inclined to attack. Intelligence reports said that the North Koreans are expected to announce the capture of Taegu on Tuesday for the first time since the end of the war, and that the North Koreans are expected to announce the capture of Taegu on Tuesday for the first time since the end of the war.
Dávila Díaz Says He Did Not Intervene Commitment With Governor
related to said investigation. He added that "during the discussion that arose there was talk of such commitment. it was not me who made mendon to him. Perhaps it was one of the other people in the group", Note Ja GálvM Maturana Gálvez Maturana states: "I understand the position of Senator Dávila Días in relation to the discussion that arose, in which he condemns< te way of working in the Senate. It is not necessary to enter into a discussion as to whether it was him or another senator who pronounced such phrases, since, in our opinion, it is not necessary to discuss whether it was him or another senator who pronounced such phrases, since, in our opinion, it is not necessary to discuss whether it was him or another senator who pronounced such phrases.