THE WORLD DAILY MASANA
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE .ISLAND, TODAY ti - Mostly cloudy with downpour" today and eeta night. IN SAN JIJAN, YESTERDAY: - Maximum temperature, 84 degrees; minimum, 72 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at" 4:30 p.m., 29.08 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, June 23. (PU). - This afternoon the" following" temperature" was reported: Chicego, M¡ New York, 79; Washington, 81; Miami, 88. Forecast" for tomorrow: more" hot and humid. Scattered showers in the evening. High: over 80.
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
ANNUAL XXXI
Entered is second cías" matter, Post Office, San Juan, F. B.
SAN JUAN, PUESTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 24, 1950
NUMBER 14059
FIVE CENTS
Labor To Do More Work From July
4 Agencies To Move To Jurisdiction Safety Board Eliminated. Another Change In Apprenticeship Council By LUIS SANCHEZ CAPPA Editor, EL MUNDO The size and administrative functions of the Department of Labor will be "greatly increased as of July 1 next under Reorganization Plan No. 3 approved by the Legislature. Four agencies which up to the present have been operating independently will be transferred to the jurisdiction of the Department. Another, recently created by legislation to that effect, will begin operations in the same area. The first are the State Insurance Fund, the Industrial Commission, the Minimum Wage Board, and the Veterans' Bureau under the direction of Colonel Miguel A. Muñoz. The FSE is administered by Guillermo Atiles Moréu, the CI is presided over by Juan M Herrero and the JSM is presided over by Cándido Oliveras, economist. Insurance for Drivers The fifth will be the Social Security Bureau for Drivers. This agency will be created within the State Insurance Fund. Officials of the Department of Labor have been working feverishly in the study and promulgation of the regulations that will be put into effect to implement the law that established the social security for drivers. The Treasury Department promulgated yesterday the regulations on the collection of the contributions that will create the insurance fund. Inauguration in July Both agencies expect the new business to be in operation at the beginning of next month. Actuary Hidalgo has been collaborating with Commissioner Sierra Rerdecía in the preparation of the regulations and organization of the office. Mr. Ramon Forastlerl, Chief of the Minimum Wage Section of the Department of Labor, is assisting in this work. In addition to these five agendas which will be added to the structure of the Department of Labor, changes will be made in the appointment and appointment of the members of the Industrial Safety Board and the Apprenticeship Council as of July first. These are to study and promulgate safety regulations against accidents in the industries, which are enforced by the Industrial Safety Division of the Department, headed by Mr. Ramón Casanova Cano. Newly Created As to the Apprenticeship Council *1 change is that its members will henceforth be appointed by the Commissioner of Labor, instead of the Governor, as was heretofore the case. Both the Apprenticeship Council and the vision that implements its regulations are newly created. The division is headed by Mr. Quintin Gonzalez.
The division is headed by Mr. Quintin Gonzalez, who has been accused by Mr. Augusto P. Alvarez and Mr. Vicente Colon Mora, against whom the prosecutor Mr. Baldomcro Freyre has sworn complaints for alleged violation of Article 87 of the Penal Code. The accused Augusto P. Alvar*? was read 19 accusations for alleged violation of the referred article of the Penal Code, and against Vicente Colón Morales, only one accusation was read for the same alleged violation. According to the accusations sworn by prosecutor Baldomcro Freyre and the testimonies of 1o" witnesses who testified before the prosecutors Guillermo Gil and José C. Aponte, the amount of money involved in the accusations against the referred ones amounts to $1,842.88, which belonged to the public funds of the Municipality of Rio Piedras. 15 Days to Plead ■ After Deputy Clerk Juan Morales Díaz, of the San Juan District Court, read the indictments, the defendants, represented by attorneys Guillermo Estrella Frnsquérl (representing Augusto P. Alvarez) and Benlclo Sán. chez Castaño, (representing Vicente Colón Morales), requested from the Court 15 days in each case to make the pertinent pleadings. The two defendants pleaded yesterday allegation of innocence of the accusations read against them. Mr. Benlclo Sánchez Castaño requested a separate jury trial? The same allegation was made by attorney Guillermo Estrella Frasquerh In the complaint in which Augus. to P. Alvarez and Vicente Colón Morales appear as co-defendants, prosecutor Baldomcro Freyre alleges that "the referred defendants, during one of the days of June 1949, in Rio Piedras, and with the Intention of defrauding the World (Continued on page 16, col. 7)
Alvarez Pleads Not Guilty District Court
''V HF ' wa ' ' 4 ' ' " ¿ : ' ' ' "" * $ " " k h * gfc
Guillermo Estrella Frasquerl (Left), and the Mayor of RIO Piedras, Mr. Augusto I*. Alvarez, while appearing in I" m "ñaua de aver a ofr the reading <le the 10 accusations that the Prosecutor's Office formulates to Mr. Alvarez for alleged administrative Irregularities in the performance dKjms duties. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
Judge Ramírez Pabón Reads him 19 Accusations That the Prosecutor's Office Formulated.
The Director of Public Works of Río Piedras, Engineer Vicente Colón Morales, was also indicted By RURICQ E. RIVERA ' EL MUNDO Staff Writer
Before Judge Rodolfo Ramírez Pabón, of the San Juan District Court, appeared yesterday morning for the reading of the indictment.
A New Factory Will Be Installed In Aguadilla o A French Company Will Operate Textile Plant That Will Cost $2,200,000 " Israel Roldán Blas) - In an interview with Héctor Relchnrd, president of the Pro-Industrialization Committee of this city, he informed that the construction of a textile factory that will be located in the Borlnquen neighborhood of this municipality will soon be put up for bidding. The Albert Godde Bodin Tnc., through Mr. Henrl Barbel, from Lyon, France, established contact with Mr. Reichard and Mr. Juan Ellas Capella, treasurer of said pro-industrialization committee, more than a year ago. The negotiations were so secret that no one knew what was involved, although Mr. Barbet had already made two trips" to the island and was accompanied by the aforementioned gentlemen, examining lots and farms. The building will be constructed by the Development Company at a cost of $200,(XX) on a parcel of land of five cuerdas ceded by the Estate of Don Manuel Jiménez Serra, at a very low price, as a cooperation to the economic improvement of the community, Barbet has the Intention to baptize with the name of Jiménez to the factory, or that of his widow Doña Amalia Quiñones Mayoral. The Corporation urges- = (Continued on p. 16, col. 8)
Mayor Claims Expenditures Are Legal
Reasons For Expenditures Explained Auditor Muñoz Rivera Denies Violations. - The Mirador Case The Mayor of San Juan, Mrs. Felisa Rincón de Gautier, and the Auditor of the Government of the Capital, Mr. Luis Muñoz Ribera, in a joint statement authorized yesterday, express that according to their criteria, all the payments referred to in the press reports were made within the authority granted by law". These officials" explain the basis for the expenditures alleged to have been objected to by the Auditor of Puerto Rico, in the following statement: "Some newspapers of this Capital Juan published information on alleged illegal expenditures incurred by the Government of the Capital. These" reports are partially excerpted from the Report rendered by the account examiners of the Audit Department Ir. sillar, on Jos results of the General Investigation practiced in this Municipality. In order that the public may have a more complete view of everything related to the alleged "llégale" payments, we wish to make the following clarifications: 1- The payment of $250 to the MaHorquI. na, made on October 3, 1945, corresponds to a banquet offered by the former Administrator of the Capital, to the Cuban delegation of the Federation of Cuban Workers. 2-The payment of $54 made on November 15 by Mr. Luis Diaz, corresponds to photographs taken at said banquet. 3-The payment of $398.20 on January 8, 1946, corresponds to a lunch offered by the (interior Administrator of the Capital at the Escambrón Beach Club, to the members of the 65th Infantry Regiment, upon "their return to Puerto Rico. 4 -The $20 payment of January 18, 1946, made to Mrs. Isabel P. de Andino, was for a wreath sent on the occasion of the birthday of Mr. Gonzalo Din (Continued on page lli Col. 1) 2 Million Spent For Road Repairs More than two million dollars for road and bridge maintenance have been spent by the Department of the Interior during the 1949-50 fiscal year, which ends next Friday, January 30. The appropriations for these expenditures," divided by districts, as reported by the Department of the Interior, were distributed as follows: Sun Juan, $504,285.74; Arecibo, $300,318.17; Aguadilla, $348,152.28; Mayagüez, $292,248.06; Ponce, 288,143.84; Guayama. $244,153.51 and Humacao, $284,433.33, Fixing of Bridges In the repair of steel bridges, mechanical carving, purchase of tools, central office and other administrative expenses were Invested $638,264.97 according to the report of the Department. Total expenditures for bridge and road maintenance amounted to $2,900,000.
Work on the Río Piedras to Caguas Highway
""W- - -3 iU írW -J i > '* -' *-' *-' A * * ' * **■*'* * * % * *'í' 1 HííSÍ *- V ./4-to 'wTSii * ' ' '' J
This culvert under construction, in the Caimito neighborhood of Rio Piedras, will bypass the difficulties of two small creeks that cross the land through which the course of the new culvert has been transferred.
The sewer will bypass
rretera. The culvert that can be seen in the background, which is located on another section of the road where the embankment is already built, will replace the functions of the old
* The culvert that can be seen in the background, which is located in another section of the road where the embankment is already built, will replace the functions of the old "Puente de lo Fraile", which will disappear with the new concrete road. On the right, a view of the grading of one of the sections at kilometer 29 of the concrete road, where it has been necessary to fill with tons of concrete.
(Photos from EL MUNDO, by Luí" dyTaaenave).
High Court Will Review Batalla Case
Authorized Writ Of Certiorari Yesterday Convicted Alleges He Did Not Have Rigorous Warnings From Lower Court By Carlos Nieve" Rivera EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Supreme Court will review the case of Miguel Cirilo Batalla, co-defendant and convicted with Miguel Pa lou for the eight murders and two counts of life in the Almacenes Palou Fire. Yesterday the Supreme Court issued the writ of certlrorarl requested by Batalla through his lawyer, attorney Gaspar Gerena Bras, which means that our highest court of justice will review Batalla's case. According to Supreme Court Attorney José Rivera Barrera," in his opinion the lower court's ruling err (Continued on page 11, Col. 3) Committee No. 8 To Begin Hearings On July 18 To Investigate Several Industries, Including Needle The needle industry, among four others*, will be investigated by a special committee, with a view to setting a new minimum wage for it. The hearings will begin on July 18. The San Juan office of the Division of Time and Wages announced yesterday the appointment of a committee, representative of employers, labor and public employees, to hold public hearings and recommend minimum wages for the needle and textile manufacturing industries; men's and boys' clothing and related products; leather, leather products and related products; hook-stitch carpets; and handicraft products, a note to that effect reads, in part: "Mr. William R. McComb, Administrator of the Division of Needlework, among others, is to investigate the needle and textile manufacturing industries, among others. McComb, Administrator of the Federal Wage and Hour Division, has just announced Industrial Committee number 8, the third one appointed by him after the amendment of the Wage and Hour Law, to investigate, (in the light of the minimum wage of 75 cents an hour in force in the continental United States), the industries in Puerto Rico which have employees, either in the shop or at home, engaged in the interstate commerce. "This committee shall function under the special provisions of the Federal Wage and Hour Law which allow the Administrator to fix minimum wages in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands of less than 75 cents, upon the recommendation of tripartite committees represented equally by industry, labor and the general public. After the committee makes its recommendations, the Administrator may accept" or reject them, but may not alter any recommendation. "(Continued on p. 16, col. 5)
Social Security Regulations for the Driver's Class in Effect
Work Begins On Highway To Caguas Work Has Begun On 3 New Sections - Cost $2,009,000 By S. Gálvez Mafurnna Editor of EL MUNDO The construction work on the concrete highway from Rio Pie. dra* to Caguas has been accelerated during the awarding of the contract and the beginning of work on three new sections simultaneously. The purpose, according to information supplied by the] Department, is to solve the problems of traffic congestion and pavement preservation on this route now and for the next twenty years, with the construction of the following sections having been ordered: Project F.28, which originates at the site where the concrete section already in service between Rio Piedras and Cngua ends, extending 4.04 kilometers to Ca. The construction of this section consists of grading, drainage structures and a concrete surface with two traffic lanes, each 7.30 meters wide and separated by a 1.60 meter wide strip of grass, SuhaMa For $727,400 This section is in charge of the contractors Rexach A-Rivera Cons, T ruction Co. Inc. which was awarded the bid in the amount of $727,400.35. The cost of inspection has been calculated at $80,881 including the "contingency", and the easement at $114,163.02, being calculated at $80,881.02, calculated (Continued on page 11, Col, 4) Céigei Meets with Judges Today In connection with the meeting of district judges, prosecutors and other judicial officers to be held today morning, the Department of Justice yesterday authorized the following notice: "Summoned by the Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco, district judges and prosecutors will meet today at the Library of the Department of Justice to exchange views on the new Organic Law of the Judiciary that will take effect on July 1. "The meeting will also consider measures aimed at improving the administration of justice. Among other topics, the following will be addressed: backlogs in civil and criminal matters, plans to update the work of the courts, the functioning of the judiciary, and the new law to improve the administration of justice.
ALASKA AND HAWAII BILLS TO BE VOTED MONDAY WASHINGTON, June 23 - <I "U).- Joaeph C. O'Mahoney, chairman of the Senate Interiore* and Instilare" Affairs Committee, stated today that lo" members have "uii general agreement" that they will vote i tinea "on, lo" bill" granting eMadldaddy u Hawaii and Alaska. Questioned "l he meant that it was certain that the lune" would be voted on, Ó'Mahoney said he had explained to the Committee that, unless ha,va objections, it would vote on the" bill." He declined to predict "I the Committee will approve the bills," but said, "I think the only remaining question is whether the" territories are to be admitted, I'm just saying that the enemies of statehood believe that "I the bills are to be admitted," the current bills are eathfactorioN," Bailed Representative 'Carlos Rabassa Also Labor Leader Ulrico Rodriguez. Strike breaks out at TA farms PONCE- (Por~M7gue! Rlvera) Representative Carlos Rabassa, Juana Diaz labor leader, and Mr. Ulrico Rodriguez, an official of the Sugar Industry Workers Union of Juana Diaz, posted bail last night before Municipal Judge Jose Ortii Lecoudet. Both were charged, and arrest warrants were issued against them for an alleged crime of malicious damage". They were charged with having caused damage" to some barrels of yerblcldas owned by the Land Authority. Mr. Marcelino Olivella and Mr. Manuel Soldevila posted the $500 bonds set for each of them. On the other hand, as a result of the facts that gave rise to the denunciation and arrest of both labor leaders, yesterday a strike movement was urged on the Aguilita, Luciana, Serrano and Cristina farms, property of the TA in Juana Díaz. The police in that town reported that 532 workers employed in sugar cane cultivation tasks by the TA went on strike, while representative Rabassa claims that there are more than a thousand workers on strike. Duration of the Strike Representative Rabassa informed that the workers will be on strike "until the issue related to the use of yerblcldas by the TA is resolved". He added that (Continued on page 11, Col. 4)
Provides for Tribute Payment 30c. -7" Weekly £ .- - € Empowers Employers < To Withhold It. - Case of Chauffeurs-Employers On the date rio "yer was promulgated by the Treasurer of Puerto Rico Regulation No. 1 on Social Security for the Chauffeurs of** Puerto Rico, covering Employer's Health Insurance and Life Insurance, which was created by Act 428 of July 15, 1950. The regulations, which have been drafted in accordance with the provisions of Act 428, provide for the payment of a weekly contribution of 30 cents per driver working as such in Puerto Rico. It further provides that any employer who employs one or more drivers shall pay to the Drivers' Social Insurance Fund a weekly contribution of 30 cents for each driver employed for three or more days in a week. * By the regulation, the employer is empowered to withhold from the driver's salary or day's wages for each driver employed for three or more days in a week, the contribution of 30 cents imposed by the Law. 1 U>" Chófcrea-Patrono" The chauffeurs who are their proploti patrono", that is to say, those" who use their automobile as an instrument of work, shall pay to the Fon-J' do weekly, the amount of .'JO cents, as provided in the Regulations promulgated by the Treasurer. In the case of these drivers, the Regulations further provide for authorizing the payment of the contribution in advance, since it is "such a small amount," and advance payments may be made from 1 to 52 weeks, if the driver so desires, and the driver shall not be entitled to any other right with respect to the benefits to be received than that provided by law, which is granted on the basis of weeks in arrears. When a driver who operates *his own automobile transfers the vehicle to another on a commission, rental or salary basis, the Regulations state that he automatically becomes an employer and is obliged to pay compensation as such and to require from the person operating the automobile the corresponding contribution: "1* if it is on a salary basis, he shall withhold from his salary the contribution which the driver must contribute. Where to Pay - Employers who employ chauffeurs and chauffeurs who operate their own automobiles shall pay their contribution at the* collector's office at Snn Jvin, Santurce, Rio Piedras, 1 (Continued on page 11, Col. 3).