THE WORLD
weather forecast for HOT ISLAND. - Partly cloudy, with light showers during the day and at night. IN SAN JÜAN YESTERDAY. - Maximum temperature, M degrees; minimum. íl degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level at 4:80 o'clock this afternoon, 29.8S inches of mercury.-.
A ' " -- - , ...... -■ ¡ NEW YOBK, Dec. L (FU). - Late today m reported the following* temperatures: Nuera York, 87: Chicago, M; Wáshlngton. 44; Miami, 75. Forecasts for maflana at Nuera York and cludadoo reciñas; Moaspe good. Temperature mflxlnmt tf. e
DAILY JOURNAL OF
*LA MARAÑA
THE FIRST NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as seeond class matter, Post Office. San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY DECEMBER 2, 1950
NUMBER 14219 FIVE CENTS
Communists Bomb Pyongyang; Truman Asks Sum For Atomic, Rearmament > -
\
The head of the Red Chinese delegation, General Wu Hsul-Chuan, assumes a contemplative attitude as he learns in the United Nations Security Council of the President's statements regarding the possible use of the atomic bomb in Korea to contain the aggression of the Chinese Communists.
Chinese communists. At right is President Truman at his desk in the White House office as he repeated his statements about the possibility of using the bomb, if deemed necessary. (Associated Press photo).
Truman Reveals Talks With India
Secretly Held And Focus Attitude Toward War in Korea By BRUCE MUNN FLUSHING, Dec. 1 - (PU) - India has begun talks with Communist China on the possibility of peace in the Far East while telling the United Nations General Assembly that it must act to deal with the "extremely grave" world situation. FT.U8HING, New York< December 1, (FU)-United Nations se-retary general Tygve Lie conferred today with General Wu Hslu-Chuan, leader of the Chinese Communist delegation to the world organlsaclon. WASHINGTON, Dec. 1. - (FU) - President Truman revealed hny that the United States is holding "highly secret" talks with India on my attitude toward the Korean war. eongreslonal leaders mentioned the matter for the first time during a White House conference on the President's request for new military funds. Congressmen asked about India's reported reluctance to join the West in taking a firm stand on Korea. Some of the conference attendees later said that Mr. Truman had told them that information on that matter was "top secret" and that "talks were in progress with India. (Continued on page 18, Col. 4)
Susoni Explains PIP's Attitude Toward Nationalist Developments
Compares it with events of 1936-37. He qualifies the Constitution Law as a Provocation
Dr. Francisco M. Suoni, of the high leadership of the Puerto Rican Indapendentista Party, has authorized statements related to the recent nationalist events on the Island and to the attitude of his party* expressed in the Aguadilla Pronunciamiento, in response, as he reveals, to the continuous request of his friends for him to make such an expression.
to make such an expression. 4 The following is the full text of Dr. Suaonl's statements: "Since last October 30, very esteemed friends of mine, militants in different sectors of opinion, have been asking me to make some statement related to the auceaoa that began that day in Puerto Rico. After the recent pronouncement made in the city of Aguadilla on November 1st by the Board of Directors of the Puerto Rican Independence Party, I realized that it was unnecessary to make the statement that I was asked to make. However, the request of my friends has continued; and to comply with it, as well as to fulfill a duty of my civic conscience, which has been the most legitimate and precious pride of all my life, I make the following declarations: "The political parties obey at all times the reason for their creation and existence, and the purposes that gave vlds and body to that reason, have the unavoidable obligation to be consistent and courageous in maintaining their discipline. "The Independently Puerto Rican Party was organized to defend the postulates of the independent, sovereign and democratic republic for our people. This political management is understood by our party by the pacific way, which is the most effective and convenient to the Interests of Puerto Rico. IF we do not entedléiemoi. all the (Continued on page 36.' Col. 2)
Nationalists To Be Tried Before Juries Not Affected by Amendment to Law 53 Restoring Court of Law Trials against Nationalists accused of violating Law 53, known as the Public Safety Law, "shall be conducted before juries, unless they prefer a Court of Law. In the future, however, anyone else charged with a violation of this statute will not have the privilege of trial before a jury, since Act 53, as now amended, specifically provides that in "sot cases the proceedings shall be heard before the Court of Law. The Legislature approved last Wednesday an amendment to Article 2 of Act 53, reinstating the text originally approved in 1948, which provided for trial before the Court of Law in such cases. An amendment introduced in 1948 had repealed, inadvertently for the legislators, the part which provided that trials in such cases shall take place only before courts of law. (Continued on page 18. Col. 3)
(Continued on page 18. Col. 3)
American Paratroopers" Fail To Break Chinese Siege In Northeast Korea For RUTHEFORD M. FOATS - TOKYO, wbodo, Dec. 2. - The communiitai shelled Pyongyang today as Red divisions massed against allied defenses for what appeared to be a full-scale assault aimed at destroying or driving out the allied army in northwest Korea. At least five bombs fell at about 1:45 A.M. The antiaircraft guns of the Red Army were fired. M. The U.S. anti-aircraft guns at the Pyongyang airfield went into action. The bursting of the bombs and the cannon fire added to the tension caused by official warnings against the Chinese paratroopers and the mass movement of Communist troops toward the ancient capital. The guerrlllss were found between two to fifteen miles from the city. U.S. Marines and artillery fighting a Chinese encirclement at Choaln Dam, northeast of Korea, opened fire but did not break the enemy encirclement. The Marines inside the trap made their way six miles to the south, while convoys from the outside penetrated as far as Hagan, at the southern end of Lake Chasin. The First Division of the 10th Marine Corps and two regiments of the U.S. 7th Infantry were fighting their way out of the Chinese trap. A large-scale withdrawal southward was as close as Mr. Ooo Chinese troops would allow. A spokesman for the U.S. Tenth Corps said that the Americans had killed an average of six thousand Chinese in the last five days of their battle around Choaln Dam. The Army was in suspense as to whether the Seventeenth Regiment of the 7th Division had received orders to surrender its hard-won position at Hyeasanjln on the Manchurian border, northeast of Choaln Dam. They were in desperate need of more troops for the Allied reaistoneta in Pyongyang. These could only come immediately from the Tenth Corps forces in the northeast. And there the Marines and the 7th Division were struggling to survive.
American, British, British, South Korean and Turkish troops were closing in on the new line of defense, 25 miles to the northwest.
Two Boricua Sergeants Recapture at Fort Brooke
_JBBB tfBBta IB ■ Bl*. - F s HI fRn ¿ HI tJHH - I & ' B ■ Rr "B \ v \ WBtlHBH i ■ / Jr v ™¡ '<jwÉJr I . m 'V \ >HW'<ni Br ■ : - /,/ W V i . t u¿ w- / , / i r \j I LA W / I ' B BL-' ■ JE ■' bCb ■L > Jli ti® W -JH' 9a 9B ■ A * w II me H& ' JBv B
Loa Sgt. Angel L. Acevedo (left), and Francisco Garcia Morales (right), members of the 85th Infantry Regiment, were wounded at Co-
rea, and are now convalescing at the General Rodrigues Hospital, Fort Rrooke, San Juan. (Photo from EL MUNDO).
The. Expansion To The Asylum
Describe How They Were Wounded In Korean Guerrilla Struggle ♦ Angel Acevedo and Francisco Morales Say "War E" Spooky. Soldiers' Wives Visit Them By BORICO E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO Both for Ange! L. Acevedo Bernard and Francisco Garcia Morales, two sergeants of the 85th Infantry Regiment of Puerto Rico, confined at the Rodrigues General Hospital at Fort Brooke in San Juan recovering from wounds received in the Korean war front, Christmas began when they set foot on Puerto Rican soil.
3,600,000 To Be Invested In New "Building". - The contract was authorized on December 1 to begin work on the new Psychiatric Hospital of the Department of Health, according to the Chief of the Department's Hospital Census Bureau, Mr. Julio A. Pires, who reported that the cost of the work is 13,000,000. In the offices of the Department of the Interior, the contract for the construction of the hospital was filmed yesterday, between contractors Martin Martel, Felix Leon and Gabriol Guijarro, and Mr. Julio A. Pires and Mr. Martorell, of the Department of the Interior. The contract covered the construction of new buildings and remodeling of others. After the construction of the new buildings, the patients will be moved into them and the engineers will proceed to remodel the old buildings, enlarging some of them, to which additions will be made. One of the buildings to be constructed will be the admissions building, with a capacity of 80 beds. This building will receive the cases to be admitted to the institution, and those who are believed to be able to recover within three to six months will remain there. Patients who require a longer period of time for their recovery will be transferred to other buildings. The Most Modern This building, as reported by Mr. Perez, will be the most important of all, because it will have faclllda(Contlnued on page 18, Col. 1>
again a few weeks ago. Fortunately for these compatriots, the wounds received in the performance of their military duties were not serious. Acevedo Bernard was wounded in an arm which was fractured at the wrist and Garcia Morales lost a finger on his left hand. Both gave a bitter account of their experiences in the bloody Korean war front, which they describe as a grisly and tragic thing. Work of the 05th Infantry They praised the work of their regiment, which carries out the very difficult work of patrolling, reconnaissance of enemy-infested terrain and even guerrilla work. They also stated that the 65th Regiment was put into action two weeks after arriving at the port of Pusan. They noted that the allied troops were mostly exhausted by the constant fighting they had to endure when the North Korean communists were sweeping southward. They also agreed that the greatest gift a soldier can receive from us in Korea is a letter, no matter who writes it. The Puerto Rican man is looking forward to his homeland and burning with the desire to know how things are here. Regarding the problem of the car(Continued on page 18, Col. 5)
Justice Decrees Working Day For Prisoners Starts San Juan District Jail. The Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, established yesterday the eight-hour workday for the penal guard of the San Juan District Jail. He said he hoped to extend the schedule to the other prisons, as soon as he names, as he expects to do shortly, 35 new penal guards for these institutions. "With this measure," said the Attorney General, "a request that the prison guards have been making for some time is being met." The Association of Penal Guards had sent a memorandum to all legislators, outlining their problems. They alleged that they were working "only 300 hours a month," (Continued on page 18, Col. 2).
In Message to Congress Accuses Russia
President's Request For $17,978,247,000 In Message To Congress Accuses Russia Of Serious Risk Of War President's Request For <17,978,247,000.Order Recruiting By DAYTON MOORE WASHINGTON, Dec. 1. - CPU) - President Truman today called for $17,078,247,000 in new military and atomic funds to be voted "with the greatest speed" for the Korean war to support the American armed forces. Jos. against communist attacks at other points. WASHINGTON, Dec. 1. (FU)-The Army requested 10,000 conscripts for the February mea, bringing to 800,000 the number of conscripts requested since the Korean war began, The President made the request for funds in a special message in which he categorically charged Russia with encouraging the invasion of Korea by Communist China in the full knowledge that it "involved a grave risk of war." He said the new red attacks "cast an ominous shadow over the prospects for world peace." Warning that the situation was ''grave." sefior TrBUte Urgently urged the romee- , alon of 118,844,347,000 for the Army, Navy and Air Force: $1,060,000,000 for the Atomic Energy Commission, and 884,000,000 for the Teneaf Valley Authority, which supplies electric power for the atomic plant at Oak Ridge, Teneaf. Already Congress has given the President what he has asked for, even with full knowledge that this will mean greater calls for service, stronger regulations for the Selective Service and greater sacrifices on the home front, Recruiting Ordered In this connection, the Army today ordered the Selective Service to draft 50,000 conscripts in February, raising its total draft requests so far to 300,000 men. Although the Navy and Air Force have not (Continued on page 18, Col. 7)
Mayagüez Gets Rural Units The Mayagüez Municipal Housing Authority has received an allocation of 500 units in the rural housing set-aside program, but not farms, the Federal Public Housing Administration in San Juan revealed to the agency. The rural housing program of this type is a low-cost rental housing program, which has the following conditions: (1) it is not located in an urban area, and (2) it is not located in a rural area, and (3) it is not located in an urban area, and (4) it is not located in a rural area.
River Floods Cause Deaths and Flooding in Coamo and Juana Díaz
Bk li Sk . -B ■U í i 1 ' jRm EV Á-ÍH B ' 7'" ' * B fH x I JkHS* 1 í jBp^JB^B. kH mb 31 BBBL1 aM HH -áBOk - I -bBI BT > RUI 1 / &■■■■ O ,rv* I m i' i b " i \ ' W - v' H Bg* *?
The heavy rains that fell during this week in the southern part of the Island, caused large river floods or flooding. The worst of these was in Coamo where the Cuydn River swept away a house with its owner inside, killing her and a neighbor who tried to save her. In the first photograph we see the flooded area of the road between Coamo and Juana
the road between Coamo and Juana Dtu; in the center we see one of the landslides on the banks of the Cuyón river, which endangered several houses. On the right is Carmen Lucila Rivera, daughter of 1* aeflora Nlcotaaa Rivera Escalera, who perished when she was
She is accompanied by the mayor of Ooeme, aeflor Hermógenee Péree, who went to the scene of the tragedy to raise awareness of the dangers caused by the river. Jocó Bonilla Alvarado was also swept away by the river.
The river was also dragged down by the river to try to "air the mother of Carnea Luella. In Juana Díaa a man drowned when he tried to "rair an eroded river, and another man was drowned when he tried to raise a quabrada that was also swollen. fFotoe EL MUNDO, by Víctor M. Madera).