THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly to occasionally cloudy,, with dUpper" showers, IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 77 degrees"; low, flfl degrees". Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 20.99 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, fehterq 10, (PU). -At I" afternoon today "e Reported the" "lguiente" temperature"; New York, 42; Chicago, 4é¡ Washington. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities": cloudy, with scattered showers." Maximum temperature, 43.
morning newspaper of the morning.
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXX.
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY FEBRUARY 11, 1950
NUMBER 13928
FIVE CENTS
Textron Chief Says Island Could Increase Its Purchasing Power _
Fuchs Makes No Allegation When Treason Accusation Is Read to Him
Ministry I* u b I i c Tells Court of Incredible Plot By ROBERT MUSEL LONDON, Feb. 10. - (PU) - Klaus Emil Julius Fuchs, Britain's third most prominent atomic energy scientist, was indicted today after confessing to betraying important American and British atomic secrets to Russia. In the small courtroom at number three Bow Street, the prosecution recounted an incredible plot of a man who "divided his mind" between his loyalty to Britain, his adopted homeland, and his Communist "ideals". "A unique mastermind in the world of psychology" - "A Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" in life r-""l (Continued on page 13, Col. 2).
/ A - ,z mmm bbi KEUS FUCHS
University Will Only Admit 1,800 Egg Students Next Year
In Mayagiíez New Adniixionrs Will Be Fewer Than 500.- Bunker Has Transmitted Instructions
Only a total of 1,800 undergraduate students will be admitted to the schools in Puerto Rico next year. The University Registrar and the directors and counselors of the Island's colleges on the existing situation regarding the admission of new students. He indicated to the aforesaid" directors and counselors, in addition to the figures mentioned, that the number of solid- . so many that may be admitted during , the next academic year will be approximately equal to that of the past aff- 1 do. Last year, according to this newspaper, hundreds ' of students were unable to enter the University of Puerto Rico and were absorbed by the University of Santa ' Marla, in Ponce, ' the Colegio Poli- j técnico, the Colegio del Sagrado Corazón and other private schools, among which were the Colegio Mostos, the ' Junior College and the City College, of Río Piedras. Other instructions given by Mr. Bunker to the directors and counselors of the colleges, regarding the rules for admission to the UPR during 1950, are the following: "Students" who are not likely to obtain their diploma with a 2.00 or better by June 15, 1950, should be directed in another direction, as their application will be rejected. "Those candidates who obtain their high school diploma before June 5, 1950, will be required to send to this office a certificate from the] principal of the school stating that they obtained their high school diploma with an index of 2.00 or better. The list* of ale(Continued on page 14. Col. R)
The list* of new students during the Mayagüez school year is as follows: 'I, Mr. Harri" F. Bunker, told Andresen, "A Revision of the Sugar Law Would Increase the (aiola to Puerto Rico and Continental Areas WASHINGTON, February ló (Special to EL MUNDO" - Congress will be asked to revise the Sugar Law in order to increase the number of students in Puerto Rico and mainland areas. Congress will be asked to revise the sugar quota law to allow for an increase in production in domestic sugar areas to counteract the expected increase in the sugar industry in Puerto Rico and mainland areas. í Mincsota Representative August M. Andresen told the Journal today that Cuba has granted seven different concessions to a U.S. miller to establish a wheat mill in Havana to use foreign wheat and deprive U.S. farmers of a market for wheat produced on more than 530,000 acres of land. He stated that farmers will have to find other products for the acres that will be left without a market. The United States does not produce enough sugar, he added. "Serla possible to produce sugar from ! (Continued on p. 14. Col, 6"
MP 'WBt" ■ MBA f 1 E II MM - -K-g. MBMS - B ■ W -J&WB ' ,1 | .' BmL. II V UA M j "mL* a te j- HF MME ।Jnvljy i 71 >..Taíw A r ". arwSl?' ZZj MK ' ? -MWkii - ' 3 aram , TlLgBMM
'"* ■'BF BMteWRrW'.'l" ® P zvoc-*-/ "- r"% v > One of the "few" coffee roasters selling the fragrant bean to the public is Garrido & Cía. of Caguas. Even from Ma-
yagiloz and A receipt person" come to htiNcar "u pound of ground coffee, not to buy. In the center, the nlornno grain while" e" roasted. In the first photograph, we see hundreds of people making a tour of the last one, we see an ohrer pouring the roasted coffee into the machine.
The firm has served the" eantra" eantra" eantra" eantra" eantra" eantra. The firm has served the" eantldade" rf" custom - hospitals and añilo". (Photos EL MUNDO, by Luí" de Canenave).
By S. Gálvez Maturana Editor of EL MUNDO The city of Caguas has become a coffee mecca, where hundreds of peanas come every morning from all over the Island in search of the aromatic bean. Since the roasting of
Since the Café Crema roastery established direct sales to consumers, the lines that begin to form in front of the establishment in the early hours of the morning extend up to about a kilometer from the roastery to the exit for the town of Aguas Buenas.
Mr. Blas Delgado, of the firm Garrido and Company, which is the operator of this roastery, reported that people from towns as far away as Arecibo and Mayagüez have come to buy coffee. Yesterday, one hundred and two hundred and two quintals of coffee were distributed directly to the consumers.
The price of coffee was 51 cents per pound, but some people did not get their quota because the intense work to which the mills were subjected caused a breakdown, paralyzing them until today.
Mr. Francisco Garrido, owner of the roastery, informed yesterday that his firm was avoiding by all means that the coffee sold to alleviate the situation in the population of Caguas would fall into the hands of speculators. Yesterday two people were in.
I jailed two persons. whom Mr. Gartido himself alleges he caught selling the coffee he bought at 51 cents, at a price of 75 and 90 cents. Both persons were denounced, having been caught during the operation.
I Likewise, the "members" of the 1 Tollcía Insular who daily are in charge of maintaining order in the crowded line in front of the roastery, took out of it several young men who are dedicated to take turns to sell the goods to the people who come from the Interior.
The people who come from the interior of the island, Twenty chavos and do not take turns ...! i A does not wait in line! Elias and other expressions "or the style were the battle cry of said" mozalbetes who tried to make the most of the public's anxiety' (Continued on p. 14, Col. 8).
House Asked For Further Encouragement Says Island Program Benefits U.S. Business By Paul Southwick ' WASHINGTON, Feb. 10.-(PUW Royal Little, president" of the Tex "H ¡ Iron Corporation, said today that r||| : adequate" stimulus to its industrialization program t, the Island's ad-A quisitive power "n the market*! In recent years," ln "9 ' sulare" purchases of continental items® have exceeded $300,000,000 annually.® But exports to the Contin "n--1 fe have been $100,000,000,Dno more, pot*fl below imports for the same years. ! Little was one of the first mainland industrialists "n apt.O 1 to take advantage of the concessions off crida" peek ; Puerto Rico's new investment program, which includes a twelve-year tax moratorium and assistance from the island government in setting up factories. p - The industrialist made "a prediction IJ about ri" the" potentialities riel0 i Insular purchasing power in anal I statement anf" the ri" M"-r| I ri" Committee of the House thatH i is sponsoring view" on ; the tax reforms* proposed.Little was asked to "n M around" the Administration's proposal to revise the federal tax rates that affect the caiitatlva' ions". Lit-B I fie is founder of the Rhode Island Charities Trust. Officials f "rie.B rale" allege that rata foundation, -/B ¡ other "imilnre" organizations, nny| are nothing more than companies holding "B gilded ri" industrial empires, which "B are evading the spirit, ta letter, of the tax laws" 9 which exempt eofl for-profit organizations from federal income taxes". ?? The closing of Fahrlcan | The closing ri" various" ri" its fubi icjgM in New England by Textron,■ I provoked a storm. Lo" congre-l® slstas of New England ban de-B nuncíado indignantly qu" Little c".|H rró factory* "*on the Continent, pars M take advantage of low* wages and Is " J exemptions cont t ibutn as in Rico. H As in d past. Little denied today that he would close factories "nB New England to take advantage of the benefits* of wage* and tax exemptions* under the insular program. í "í| , Rep. Atm" 3. Democrat of Rhode Island, asked Little why. if he was so interested in the lock, he would close " ¡"IB in Nine Na to open another one* in Puerto Rico. H New YorlcB Democrat Walter A, Lynch also i-nterrp. J® gó to Lhtflo Hfprrn d" la* razone" that loJIevaion to close "U" f á hi iras in 'New England to e*. lahlecer nie vas factory* in the hh.M 'Continue on I" page 14 Col 2'
Sick Claim Healed by Hearing Evangelist.
- flHMI ' J L w , t 9wf 1 * ' C 1 - CV_ 75 ® '' - - - . B $$$ . 91 9ie '' i ' 91 9S9L Ww > & >í B/ BHHBBBFL'' The "vangellsfu T. L. Osborne, - who has been celebrating in f'eleven exercised" ."eligíoso" during lo" rúale" "e claims to have cured several" person", - observes Angela Santiago, eleven afto" of rdad, who is reported to have been blind since nuw afto". being also Inútil <lel arm and right pler- * na. (El, MUNDO photo by Victor Madera).
5,000 People Attend Ponce City Event -■ --- Meetings Continue - Another Preacher Begins Campaign on Monday PONCE. February 10. (By Miguel Riverai-Ant a large turnout estimated at five thousand people, evangelist T. L. Osborne continued last night to hold "his religious services at the basketball court in the Morel Campos neighborhood of Ponce. The services were attended by the lame, the lame, the paralyzed and people claiming to have every ailment known to man. At the end of the services, many said they felt cured of their ailments, or improved. One woman suffered a syncope as hundreds of people milled around the pastor to get tickets for tonight's services. The victim was Juanita Rodriguez, 40 years old, who had to be hospitalized in ekMbfplUl Trlcoche. Among the people who were assisted by the evangelist and who claimed to feel cured or improved from their ailments were: Angela Santiago, 11 years old, who was blind since she was nine years old and alleges that she sees quite well; Luz Maria Rodriguez, stutterer, who is alleged to speak more easily; Manuela Romero; Miguel Bermejo; Oscar Marrero, tubercular under treatment, who was put to jump and did not fatlgó; Carlos Torres, affected with retímatlamo; Mmin Isabel González, sick of the kidneys; María Ro. dríguez, pains in the womb; Simón Gómez, sight defecturfHa; ¡limón Santiago, throat affection; Guadalupe Toro, effusion ce(Cont. on page 14, Col. 5)
The (onninism in the ("aribe Reds sc A gi t a ii in Guatemala After Left-wing Movement By" FITZHUGH TURNER From In In Editorial Staff of the New York Herald Tribune The United States also has a vulnerable spot, Central America and the Caribbean, where there are difficulties. Unrest plagues the coffee, sugar and banana republics. While
America tries to combat communism in Europe and Asia, the Latin American "communists" are hurting where it hurts the most. Personal and ideological hatreds burn among presidents and dictators, small fights disturb the rule, rumors of war break the intermittent tropical peace, and some say a great explosion is coming. Some others say that it is foolish to talk of explosions, that the State Parliament and the Organization of American States can deal with the danger. But diplomatic pressure has achieved nothing impressive so far; the ingredients are still there. Cuba and the Dominican Republic are engaged in an ongoing dispute; Haiti and the Dominican Republic are at each other's throats; Costa Rica and Nicaragua have become cholericly embroiled. Conspiracies and machinations are developing wherever one turns one's eyes. And the flame of the unruly child among formerly good neighbors, the republic of Guatemala, established one hundred and ten years ago, threatens to become a bigger problem than ever. In Guatemala There is Communism Guatemala is the little pals ta- ■ choned of volcanoes that. along with ¡ Cuba, is home to a private army, the Legion of the Caribbean, devoted to the overthrow of nearby governments. In the geographical sense, it is the closest Central American republic to the United States. In the political sense, it is midway with Poland, This correspondent has just returned from an investigation of conditions there, a ■ (Continued on p. 14,' Col, 1) :
Federal Agent Makes Inquiry Into Labor Frauds, Checks and Bonds Cashed in Puerto Rico By Enrique Ramirez Brau EL MUNDO Staff Writer The agent of the United States Secret Service, Mr. Charles Mickol, has called the attention of merchants and employees of banks and other public establishments not to cash checks and war bonds of the Federal Government unless the persons who are to cash them are well known. Mr. Micko adds] that "persons cashing checks or bonds are required to reimburse the United States Government" for the value of the same in cases where they have been cashed fraudulently. The traders or employees of banks who make cheques or bonds or other "ai loros of the United States with apocryphal signatures, lose the money". This editor visited Mr. Mlckel yesterday at his office in the Post Office, and Mr. Mlckel reported that he had encountered a large number of cases that ¡ (Continued on p. 14, Col. 3)
One Hundred* tie People Fetched Coffee in Caguas
Fernós Attacks Bill Philbin on Roñes
This Would Alter Tax Collection In Communication Says Approval of Measure Would Dislocate Market By William DORVILLIER WASHINGTON, March 10 -Special to EL MUNDO newspaper Bill Philbin's approval for payments of taxes on Insular rum to be made on the Mainland, and the congressional allocation of the funds for specific expenditures in Puerto Rico, would create "an almost impossible situation," said Resident Commissioner Antonio Fernós Isern in a letter to Massachusetts Democrat Philip J. Philbin. Philbin. Congressional approval of the bill would "profoundly alter the philosophy of the total structure of relations established by Congress in 1900," the letter said. Immediately after the letter was released by the Office of the Resident Commissioner, I was informed that Philibin had told his friends that he did not intend to lobby hard for the passage of his bill. His home state of Massachusetts is famous for its distilleries, and in the representative's (Clinton's) hometown such firms as the New En- ! gland Distillery, Berke Brothers, whose products are sold under the brand name of Oíd Mr. Boston, and the Felton distilleries are installed. Felton's protest It will be recalled that last year Felton protested against the use of government funds in the campaign to promote Puerto Rican rum on the Continent, It was learned today that firms on the Continent are interested in the acquisition of some rum accumulated in Puerto Rico, which they could keep in warehouses, without the advance payment of contributions to the island government, should the Philbin bill be signed into law. Philbin himself told THE WORLD shortly after his bill was introduced that it was aimed at "correcting a (Continued on p. 14 Col. 7)
College Suspends Religious Event Due to Many Curious Attendees
By NORMAN LYKES WHEATON. Illinois, Feb. 10 (PU) ■ An evangelistic meeting Wheaton college abruptly ended today in its thirty-ninth hour because of the presence of a crowd of curious onlookers whose "hearts were not set on the meeting." The spontaneous and unpremeditated meeting as it had begun ended as abruptly as it had begun, because too many onlookers had invaded the campus to hear students and faculty members pray and make public confessions of their sins. The president dN college, V. Ray- ■ mond Edman, declared the termination of "the fool of testimony" sin- after 9.00 a.m. nía- ' ñaña to avoid "publicity."
"I fear that some of the strangers who came here have been cynical and that their hearts were not in the meeting," he said. He suggested that the students leave the college chapel, where the demonstration began at 7:00 p.m. Wednesday. However, the preachers were invited to continue their confessions in private rooms. Nonsectarian School The ceremony began Wednesday during a regular weekly meeting at the college, a nonsectarian school with strict regulations against dancing, smoking, drinking, gambling and movies. Edman rose in Pierce Memorial robes to introduce the keynote speaker, the Rev. Erwon Johnson,* of the First Church of the New Testament Mission (Continued on p. 14. Col.3).
Aponte Says He Will Enforce Brown Order
E f f e c t ii a n Arrest Aguadilla City Vicéns Said Yesterday He Is Not in a Position to Set New Price As of yesterday the General Supply Administrator had not issued a new administrative order setting the new price for coffee, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Ríos informed that he was not yet in a position to issue the order. With the exception of one roastery in Caguas, all the others continue without putting the grain on the market, awaiting the new prices that could be set by the Supply Administration, worsening the shortage of the product. Arrest in Aguadilla Our correspondent in Aguadilla, Mr. Israel Roldan Blas, reports that in said locality a commission agent was arrested for selling coffee at $55 per quintal, in violation of the administrative order IDG of the AGS, which fixes said price at $47. - Commission agent Arturo Rivera Aldahondo, with residence in Mayaguez, was arrested for selling to merchant Mariano Hernandez, on Corchado Street, in Aguadilla, fresh quintals of coffee at the price of $55. The commission agent is also accused of selling 2 quintals to merchant Vicente Soto Soto, on Progreso Street, also at $55. Prosecutor Julio Fernandez Cabrera accused Arturo Rivera Aldahonrio of two infractions to administrative order 196 of the AGS, setting a bail of $10,000 for both cases in order to be released on bail. Since he was unable to post bail, the commissioner Rivera remains in the Aguadilla jail, according to our correspondent. Gratitude in Cagiin" Our correspondent in Caguas, Mr. Andres Martinez Garda yesterday sent the following telegram: "Firma Garrido y Compañía, totTefactors of Café Crema, continued selling today to hundreds of consumers, coffee flour at the price of fifty one cents. In addition to the Cagüeño people, (Continued on page 14, Col, 4).