THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Partly to occasionally cloudy with a few scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, M degrees; low, 73 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:30 p.m., 30.08 inches of mercury.
NÜBVA TOU. June t. - tu this afternoon ae Reported tas following" temperatures: New York. 79; Chicago. 76; Wáshlngton, 81; Miami. 75. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and veelnaa: clear and warm with the highest temperature near 85.
MORNING D1AR1O
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
NUMBER 14038 . * ' FIVE CENTS
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R.
SAN JUAN,
PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JUNE 3, 1950
Eastern Zone Labor Shortage
Two Centraleé Go To "Import" Them CSP Gives Them Permission For Transportation Of Groups In Trucks By M. Nieve" Rivera Editor of EL MUNDO The Public Service Commission has authorized the transportation in trucks, of workers" coming" from" another" zone", in order to solve the problem of shortage of arms in the eastern zone of the Island, The ordetrexnftlda by 1a Commission authorizes the use of 30 trucks to transport 1.800 cane workers for a period of two months and was granted at the request of Antonio Rolg, Sucesores and Ea". tern Sugar Associates. Both applicant companies will roll- - treat the rolling stock (can- ■ mlones) to be used in the service that will allow workers from San Lorenzo to Humacao and Yabucoa. Las Piedras. Juncos and Maunabo to work in the sugar cane plantations of Isa Applicants, Antonio Rolg, Sucesores, will use 20 trucks and Eastern Sugar Associates will have 10 for the indicated purposes. The petitioners alleged an emergency situation in the areas of Humacao and Yabucoa, due to the shortage of workers for the sugar cane plantations: 1" Commission conducted an investigation to determine if in fact such a situation existed in the" mentioned areas, and found sufficient grounds to consider the petitioners' request. To that end, a hearing was held in which the Department of Labor, the State Insurance Fund, and the independent por- . teadores were represented, and also present were the Senator Ca-, rrasqulllo, of that district and the Mayor of Yabucoa. The ESE admitted that the workers transported in such a manner were covered by the Workmen's Compensation Law, although it was agreed that the trucks would be protected by waxed tarpaulins or some other adequate form of protection against inclement weather. It was argued that the lack of protection in this form could give rise to diseases which would place the workers outside the terms of the benefit provided by the Act. Conditions Imposed In granting the petitioners' request, the PSC stated that "it appearing from its investigation that there is no objection to the provision of special means of protection for such workers... provided that the proper conditions are provided, Provided that proper safety measures are provided, the Public Service Commission finds that a temporary emergency exists, which requires extraordinary measures to avoid considerable damage to the economy of said area, "And acting within the powers conferred by law, hereby authorizes for a period of two months the transportation of laborers for farming purposes in 'truks' or trucks at the risk and expense, and 'in the interest of Antonio Rolg, Successors, and Eastern Sugar Associates'". The Comlsmh conditions the authorized special service by stating that "the trucks used in this work may only make one trip carrying workers to the work site and one trip returning with them to their homes". Minimum Eequlaitos . Trucks to be used for these purposes must meet the following minimum requirements set by the CSP: 1- guardrails in perfect safety conditions on the sides and rear; 2- roof, either waxed or in other suitable form; 3- three benches, one central and two lateral, duly secured to the platform. Workmen's letters shall be placed under the benches. 4-- Fixed or portable ladder at the rear end of the platform, equipped with two handrails; 5- The capacity gives a truck for (Continued on Pg. 14, Col, 6)
Alcoholics Begin Crusade And Account For Their Salvation
Several former alcoholics, among them a journalist, a school teacher and a landscaper, gave public testimony Monday night about their experiences as alcoholics, and their final rehabilitation through the Rescue Mission led by Rev. Juan Milián, The large audience gathered at Plaza Bolivar, at stop 24, on Monday night, heard with admiration the testimonies given from the podium by a group of men who were rescued from vice, just in time to avoid their total moral and physical degradation. Reverend Millon himself introduced the men rehabilitated under his spiritual direction, among whom were represented various professions and a good number of trades. A journalist, a schoolteacher, a painter
A journalist, a schoolteacher, a landscape painter, a clerk, a barber, a shoemaker and an employee of the Automobile Division of the Department of the Interior, publicly proclaimed, without hesitation or embarrassment, that in the past they were victims of alcohol and lack of faith, but that later, guided by Reverend Milián, they found the way of salvation. Journalist Impresses Journalist Rafael Nieves Rivera impressed the audience with the story of his experiences. He told how he lost job after job in the three main newspapers of the Island due to his insatiable thirst for liquor, while he also progressively lost his social and even family relationships. Nieves Rivera said that the alcoholic is a sick person so worthy of (Continued on Page 14, Col. S)
Prosecutor Acts as Witness in Court
Mrs. America Lopea, widow of Rosa, and young Francisco Casanova, survivor" of the Palou Store Fire, who appeared as witnesses" for the prosecution, are now attending as spectators in the trial against Miguel A. Palou. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
Viera Martinez Denies He Made Promise To Igitna To Cirilo Batalla Satisfying Defense Question, Says Convict Did Not Complain Of Severe Pain In Interrogation
By J. M. Garcia Calderon Editor of EL MUNDO , Testifying yesterday as a defense witness in the case against Miguel Angel Palou in the San Juan District Court, prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez denied having made a promise of immunity or any other kind to Miguel Cirilo Batalla.
After answering questions* from attorney César Andréu Ribas who repeatedly heard Batalla's allegations that he confessed to having participated in the events because he had been promised a total exoneration, Viera Martínez categorically denied said allegations and explained that not only did he not promise anything to Batalla, but that he gave him all the warnings of the law before he confessed his complicity in the fire that destroyed his life.Viera Martinez also denied that Batalla, following his arrest, requested the assistance of a lawyer, but said that, had he made the request, he would not have been accommodated "simply because the Supreme Court has ruled that persons who are under investigation for any crime cannot have legal assistance. "Is it not true that Batalla complained of severe pains while being interrogated by prosecutors and that he was not even given a balm or a P$co of mercurochrome to heal -the" wounds?" asked attorney César Andréu Ribas. Assistance to Batalla -That is not true. He never complained of pain," answered Viera Martínez. "Isn't it true then that Batalla agreed to confess and incriminate Miguel Palou because you offered to use him as a witness for El Pueblo?" the defense attorney insisted. All that Batalla put as a condition to testify was that he be allowed to talk to Paulina Diaz, to tell her these words: Eight dead". Viera Martinez added that Batalla said that he wanted to tell her the "two words". Paulina Diaz so that she would not consider him a traitor to her husband. Later, when questioned by the defense, the Prosecutor stated that he did not remember how long the interrogation of Batalla lasted, but that he remembered that he mlsmpTVItra Martinez) wrote the confession -in a maqulnlHa "with two fingers". Questioned by the defense as to whether "despite the fact that a group of doctors examined Batalla, they did not order him to be cured," Viera Martinez responded that the "doctors" who examined Batalla were "exclusively a
The General Administration of Supplies has established new prices for butter and beans, in view of the increase in the supply market. The AGS further alleges that the market trend in these items "has risen and does not offer guarantees of stability, sufhlencla and reasonable prices". ) A review of the maximum prices in force shows the new ones, which will be in force as of Monday, June 5, as follows, according to Administrative Order 203: Pure lard, price to the consumer: loose, 17 cents; packed in cartons or packages of one pound, IR cents per pound; packed in four pound cans, 78 cents per can; and packed in five and a half pound cans, $1.05 per can. The price to the consumer of beans shall be: imported, dry, in any package and of any kind, except the Idaho Small White Flat, 12 cents per pound; and white, small, of this kind, 14 cents per pound; and white, small, of this kind, $1.05 per pound.
(Continued on P. 14, Col. í)
Brown University Cancels Grade A Munoz Due East Cannot Go to E,V,
For WILLIAM DORVILLIER WASHINGTON, June 2. (PU) - EL MUNDO learned today that, because it is impossible for Governor Luis Muñoz Marin to come to the United States now, an honorary degree that was to be conferred on him by Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, during commencement exercises next Monday, has been canceled. The plans for the conferral of the degree were made by the University in recognition of the achievements of the Governor of Puerto Rico, and for his personal gifts as a writer, statesman and public servant. This would have been the first honorary degree received by Muñoz Marín from a continental university. / It Could Be Next Year Bruce M. Bigelow, vlcepresl-
Aerial view of the land" of the International Airport in I "la Verde, covering an area of 482 aerea, surrounded by beautiful" palm grove" and lagoon". The landing field will have 8,000 feet of land with enough space for larger passenger airplanes. The airport also has ample space for air terminal operations, hangars, repair shops and other facilities.
In response to a telegraphic inquiry, the President of Brown University told EL MUNDO that "the Governor of Puerto Rico is unable to attend the Brown University graduation," and therefore, "there will be no honorary degree this year. Bigelow's reply implies the possibility that the degree will be conferred on the Governor next year. Muñoz first learned about the honor during his visit to Wáshlngton earlier this year. A letter from the president of Brown University at that time invited Muñoz to attend the graduation to receive the honorary degree. It also requested that the announcement not be released until the University decided, which it did today.
Géigel Defines Section of Law on Closing of Provisions Business Must Be Incommunicado at Time* Law Where there is a business dedicated in part to the sale of provisions and in part to a restaurant, the former must be kept incommunicado and closed for one hour," said Ir fey. This was decided yesterday by the Attorney General, in an ''opinion given at the request of the Ponce Chamber of Commerce. The following is a summary of the opinion, as drafted by the Department of Justice: "The Department of Justice has been consulted as to whether under the provisions of Law number 250, approved on May 9, 1950, amending the Closing Law, the owner of an establishment dedicated in part to the sale of provisions and in part to the restaurant business may keep the restaurant business open to the public, outside the hours established by law for the closing of commercial establishments, as long as the provisions business is kept duly closed. Law number 250 of 1950 provides in part that commercial establishments shall remain closed to the public on the days and at the hours specified in the law. \ I understand that if there is an establishment dedicated in part to the sale of provisions and in part to the restaurant business, what the law requires is that the provisions business remain closed to the public and that no commercial transactions may be carried out therein.
An Aerial View of the International Airport Grounds in Isla Verde
■ - - i. _ l. .. "yo rSpm ■*..-, - ~v-.<- 4 - #- - jir., >>j¡ ' ¿ar -♦■-v ¿ ! ¿.v /£ : - ■■ ".>-- * </r' ' Mr "''' fe ' ' '' - - - --WAS'' > '- '- , '■- ' ' ' x - A ■■' ■ . ■i
facilities. The contractor" for this" work" has "on the ground equipment to the value of $1.5 million. The re. The haying and grading of the site will be completed by the end of this year, but the construction of the runways and other facilities necessary for the airport to be ready for use will not be finished for another three years (photo Hamilton Wright Organisation).
Acheson Believes Third Weapons Shipment to Allies Likely
By John S. Steele WASHINGTON, June 2 (PU) - Secretary of State Dean Acheson today warned Congress that the United States will probably have to send a third delivery of arms to help its allies unless there are considerable changes" in Russian policy. Acheson testified before a joint session of the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committees "on President Truman's request for $1,222,500,000 for the second installment in the Military Assistance Program. Acheson urged approval of the funds "without delay". He placed special emphasis on the importance of the fight against communism in Southeast Asia. Then, under questioning, he said the Administration might have to ask for more money.
Administration might have to ask for more money. Stressing the importance of fighting Communism everywhere, Acheson also said that President Truman's request for authority to assist any nation whose defense was in the interest of U.S. security was a matter of "urgency. He also supported Truman's request to sell arms to any nation threatened with Communist aggression and endorsed the President's request to remove the ban against shipments of production machinery and equipment to European arms factories. The North Atlantic Pact countries would get $1,000,000,000,000 of the funds for the second year. Greece and Turkey; $120,000,000; (Continued on Pg. 14, Col. 8)
AFH Scores Another Record In Month Of May
Authorizes A Total Of 256 Loans Carpenter Says There Is Big Construction Boom In Housing Program By Luis Sanchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer Puerto Rico is going through an era of a remarkable boom in the construction of homes, according to information supplied yesterday by Mr. F. D. Carpenter, director of the Puerto Rico office of the Federal Housing Administration. Mr. Carpenter revealed that last May set a record for the number of applications and grants of individual mortgage loans processed by the Federal Housing Administration in Puerto Rico. He added that island and national banks granted a total of 256 home construction loans during the past month, which marked the agency's 11th year of operation. The 256 loans processed by the agency, granted by the banks and guaranteed by the AFH represent a total "urn of $2283,000," Mr. Carpenter added, a sum that surpasses all previous months of the eleven years. The "firm" bank "has continued to lend" normally and liberally, according to the federal official. He pointed out that this number of loans is independent of the housing projects that are currently being erected under other titles of the federal housing law. These projects, carried out by contracting firms," have also experienced a considerable boom lately, he said. Reason for the Increase . Explaining the reason for this increase in AFH loan applications and awards, Mr. Carpenter explained that many individuals and families who have been putting off their home construction projects in anticipation of lower-priced construction materials and labor have opted to undertake them. This is because they may have (Continued on p. 14, Col. 4)
Classes ended yesterday in schools
Island's Grade Passers Expect Half a Million in Upcoming Enrollment, Lack of Facilities By BENJAMIN SANTANA Staff Writer of EL MUNDO Yesterday, classes officially ended in Puerto Rico, initiating a new vacation period that "will extend until August 7, when the new school year will open. Some 463,700 students in all primary and secondary grades were promoted at the end of the school year yesterday - 58,000 of whom received sixth, ninth and twelfth grade diplomas. Total enrollment in all public and private schools in Puerto Rico is expected to reach half a million by the opening of the next school year on August 7. Graduations at all levels, with the exception of a few isolated cases, were held during this week following the norms established by the Department of Instruction in relation to these activities. Commissioner Mariano Villaronga yesterday expressed his "satisfaction "* for "the great step forward that has been taken on the Island in this regard. Greduacione" Aobrlae It is already a thing that belongs to the past the celebration of lavish graduations" in which the" students came forced", many times" with sacrifices, to compete in luxury and pomposity, Also have disappeared the speeches that did not lead to any practical purpose, as it has been commented in Instruction, and the traditional "honors" of the classes, known as Valedictory, Salutatory and Essay, that so many quarrels caused in the past. The graduations have been characterized this year by their simplicity, sobriety and educational purpose. The graduation ceremonies have been held in the "mUmoi" teaching rooms or in the "log patio" of the "escuetas". The educational benefit of these events has reached not only the students, but also their parents and family members and the community.
There is a daily surplus of 10,000 liters of milk / f in the livestock industry.
Capital District to be Used to Test Educational Plan
Eruto RiveraTosado Will Act in Property.Instruction Plans By Benjamín Santana Editorial of EL MUNDO The Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Mariano Villatonga, announced yesterday the permanent appointment of Mr. Erasto Rivera Togado, as Superintendent of Schools of San Juan. He had been occupying the position on an interim basis since last January 16, following the death of Mr. Verner E. Taylor, former Chief of this school district. In only four months, Mr. Rivera Togado has done such a "magnificent" job of reorganizing the district, as Commissioner Vlllaronga commented yesterday, that many of its educational problems have been solved to his satisfaction. As a result of this reorganization, all the students in the school have been able to (Continued on Page 14, Col. 8)
Kr""ln Rivera To.nd<>. appointed *n property Superintendent of School" of the Capital.
Air Service Hearing To Be June 12 CAB Expected To Decide On Island Improvements. - Hamilton Wright, a publishing firm, reported yesterday that it expects the Civil Aeronautics Board to take final action on Puerto Rico's petition for improved passenger and cargo air service between San Juan and the United States at an upcoming hearing to be held on June 12 in Washington. At this hearing, which has already been postponed twice, the full board will be asked to "test the" recommendations of its examiner, who tentatively approved the extension of a certificate to Eastern Air Lines to operate the San Juan-New York route, which is currently served exclusively by Pan American Airways, The Hamilton Wright firm explains that "although these delays" have only served to increase the Island's problems, some relief has been obtained in the filing of applications by both airlines" to establish specific" fares" to serve as an incentive "to the summer season's tourist program. "La Eastern," he adds, "has requested permission to establish a $4160 fare between Miami and San Juan, while Pan American has offered a $130. round trip fare between San Juan and New York, a twenty dollar reduction" over the present fare. The Civil Aeronautics Commission has approved Pan American Airways' request for a $130 first class fare between San Juan and Miami. Importance of the "Hearings" Hamilton Wright further reveals that "many decisions are pending at the hearing, but in the meantime Puerto Rico's economy is suffering as a result". Since the industrial program of Puerto Rico has been responsible for the establishment of seventy-seven new industries, most of them without the need of economic aid of any kind, but with the help and cooperation of the Industrial Development Company. . * The investment of more than $7,000,000 in the construction of the Caribbean Hilton, for the purpose of promoting the tourist industry to a business of $25,000,000 annually, and the construction of a new hotel in the Caribbean, with a view to the establishment of seventy-seven new industries, for the most part without the necessity of financial aid of any kind, but with the aid and cooperation of the Industrial Development Company.
Current Prices Will Not Be Revised Vicéng Believes Situation Is No Basis For It.CPR Offer at 15-3 4 By S. Gálves Maturana Editor of EL MUNDO An increase in milk production, motivated, according to the opinion of several cattlemen, by the spring season, is causing a surplus of this product, calculated at one" ten thousand liters per day. The ranchers explained that during the spring season the pastures are more abundant* and production increases greatly, increasing the stock of the product in the cattle ranches. They also claimed that the public has become accustomed to the use of powdered and evaporated milk, due to the prevailing price, which, together with the drop in consumption and the increase in production, has created a daily surplus. M h" created the daily surplus we indicated. The Admlnlstraclón.GenersI de Suministro" has no knowledge of this situation. Mr. Antonio Viéns Río" was questioned yesterday. He reported that he had no knowledge of such situation, adding that n" obafante-ta AGS would be marttlen* at "obre any changes that may occur in the future. Milk at 16 8 4 d". The Puerto Rico Coffee Growers' Cooperative has offered "1 "eftor Vlcéni Ríos milk at a price d" fifteen and three-quarters cents per liter for the Government, as formed to EL MUNDO yesterday.... The "eftor Vicéna Rio" "1 be c"£ "ultado anbre the ""unto, manifest that "eio not tlené nothing to do? Subsequently, we insisted on the information about a post-revision in the prices set by the AGS through an Administrative Order. The Supply Manager replied that although he was aware of the situation, the basis of a surplus that we communicated to him was not sufficient for a price revision. The price " that Cafeteros de Puerto Rico has offered milk "1 Government is six cents" and a quarter less than that fixed "1 public by |a AQS. that *" of twenty-two cents pasteurized. Surplus Elaborated" It was reported yesterday that in order to take advantage of the surplus several" firm" have gone into the business of elaborating the same, putting it on the market in the form of different products derived from milk, "The Cooperative of Coffee Growers of Puerto Rico is elaborating "u surplus in the form of cheese, e! which is fervid or at home at the price of fifty cents" a pound. Another plant is producing chocolate and other derivatives and, as reported to EL MUNDO, is trying to organize a cooperative to produce the total surplus, in order to take advantage of the product. It was not possible to obtain information to this effect from the Livestock Sector of the Association of Farmers", due to the fact that its President is traveling in Europe, "according to the Executive Secretary, Mr. Virgilio Ramo". A few days ago, a Commission of Cattlemen was summoned by Mr. Vicéns Rios to a conference, in which also participated the owners of pasteurizing plants, and those who requested the AGS to fix a uniform price for the product permanently. The results of this conference have not yet been made public.