THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Patchy to occasionally cloudy during scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High 78 degrees; low 87 degrees. Barometric pressure at 4:80 p.m., 80.00 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, "n "ro $7. - (FU) - Ea" afternoon today -- recorded the" following" temperature": New York, 38; Chicago, 28; Wáahlngton, 41; Míami, 78. Predictions for New York and neighboring cities tomorrow: clear and cold weather. Low temperatures between 28 and 30 in the city and between 15 and 30 in the northern suburbs. Temperature in the low to mid 80s.
THE DAILY NEWSPAPER OF THE TANGLE
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
YEAR XXX
£Toff£,^ n SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JANUARY 28, 1950
NUMBER 13918
FIVE CENTS
Agriculture Denies Closing Sugar Business
Says No Definite Offer Made I However Has Green Light From ACE For Special Island Purchase By JAMES F. CUNNINGHAM WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 - 'PU) - Officials of the Administration of Economic Cooperation reported today that they have given the green light to the Department of Agriculture to make a special purchase of sugar from Puerto Rico that could reduce 200,000 tons of over-quota sugar sold to the Cuban market. But Agriculture Department officials tonight denied reports that they had made the purchase. Agriculture Department officials told the United Press that they had not even made a "definite offer" to buy the surplus from Puerto Rico for shipment to the occupation zones in 1950. Cuba supplied all the sugar purchased last year for the occupation zones -- about 511,000 short tons," according to other Agriculture Department experts. Meanwhile, it was reported from San Juan that the Puerto Rican cofia harvesters said they had received and accepted a definite offer for sale to the Department of Agriculture of 228,880 tons at 4.75 cents per pound. An official of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association (N. of R. Manuel Gonzalez Quiñones, president of the Colonist Sector) visiting here, gave reporters this morning the impression that the transaction had been consummated. Poro George Dice, of the Department of Agriculture's Sugar Division, called the news "premature". Dice said that "we cannot deny that we have the matter under consideration, but anyone who tells us that the transaction has been resolved or concluded is either misinformed or misquoting us. The issue arose after Puerto Rico discovered that it had enough raffia to produce 1,3800000 tons of sugar in 1950, but market" for only 1,015,000 tons within quota. The Department of Agriculture proposed reductions in production, to avoid large "surpluses. The Government of Puerto Rico said that surpluses would lead to unemployment and economic problems. The Government initiated a campaign to persuade the! Department to harvest all or most of the quota. Resident Commissioner Fernós asked the Economic Cooperation Administration to purchase the surplus so that Puerto Rico would not be forced to reduce production. The ACE has said it would consider buying Puerto Rican sugar, as well as Cuban sugar, at world prices a cent to a cent and a half below the prices paid for domestic sugar. Some Puerto Rican harvesters have been opposed to cutting their coffee to sell at the world price. But when the world price rose Monday to 4.75 cents," they apparently changed their minds. Puerto Rican sugar growers estimated that if ACE bought as much sugar as proposed, they would receive $2,500,000 less than they would at domestic prices. An ACE spokesman told Prensa Unida: "We are not in a position to confirm or deny rumors that the transaction has taken place. ACE has authorized the Department of Agriculture to consider acquiring sugar from Puerto Rico as the Island is willing to sell at the world price." The spokesman declined to say whether ACE has limited the amount of Puerto Rican sugar to be purchased. Indications are that it will not buy more than 200,000 tons. ACE sources indicated that sugar would go to occupied Germany to which the Army and ACE shipped Cuban sugar last year. Tentative Agreement On the other hand, a dispatch from William Dorvilllor, correspondent of EL MUNDO in Washington, said: "The Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington today told EL MUNDO that the tentative agreement reached between the Federal Agriculture Department and the Colonos Section of the Puerto Rico Farmers Association, regarding the disposition of the sugar surplus, shows that it is necessary to amend the Sugar Cane Law. "It does not seem fair," said Dr. Antonio Fernós Isorn, "that the domestic areas are in the position of being forced to sell on the world market, at world prices, while the domestic market is depending on foreign countries to supply a large part of the sugar for domestic consumption." ' Continued on P. 12 Col. 8)
Salvador V. Caro Has Not Resigned Denies Rumors And Says He Has Confidence Of Muñoz And Directors Mr. Salvador V. Caro, administrator of the Transportation Authority will not be resigning his position for the time being, according to what was reported yesterday by Mr. Caro himself. Regarding rumors circulating that the Transportation Authority Director has resigned to accept the administration of a hotel, with an annual salary of $14,000, Mr. Caro denied such rumors. Mr. Caro said: "As long as I have the confidence of the Governor and the Board of Directors of the Authority, and as long as projects such as the International Airport are in my hands, my resignation is not possible. Unless I lose the confidence of the Governor and the Board of Directors, which up to this moment I absolutely enjoy". The version of Mr. Caro's resignation circulated in San Juan, after commenting on the facts in a radio program in that sense. Jose Acevedo Castañeda Was Captured Yesterday Offered No Resistance When Arrested Near Andreu Ribas Office By 9, M. Garcia Calderon EL MUNDO Staff Writer Jose Alborto Acevedo Castañeda, whose spectacular escape at noon last Thursday caused the suspension of the trial in the San Juan District Court, was captured ten hours after his escape and taken to the Jula Clinic, where he was being held. Acevedo Castañeda's dramatic escape ended around 11:00 Thursday night, when he was captured in San Juan Cove, near the office of attorney César Andréu Ribas. Acevedo Castañeda escaped from the Jullá Clinic with the help of another patient, whose cooperation allowed him to save more than 12 feet of fence. Authorities were questioning yesterday Leoncio Negron, a hospital aide who is alleged to have provided the escapee with a pair of khaki pants and a blue shirt. According to what was reported to the authorities, Acevedo Castañeda took a bus on Ponce de Leon Avenue, after escaping and moved to the Quintana neighborhood of Hato Rey, where ayo Leoncio Negron resides. Feared Aggression Negron told the authorities that Acevedo Castañeda arrived at his house around 6:00 p.m., wearing pajamas, and that he agreed to give him his pants and shirt for fear that Acevedo would attack his children and his wife. Negrón also said that Acevedo Castañeda left shortly after, without worrying about 1o" us who were curiously observing him. Before he was captured, Acevedo was seen by Santurce, in an automobile with license plate number (Continued on Page 16-Col. 3).
One of the scenes of the communist disorder shortly after the arrival of the Americans to Ber-
' -w-w-w-w,,, -------- fe Ir JM jK ML glu B -í 1 I I I JH " I"
lín. After shattering the glass of the door of the Alcal. day, in order to get in, the co-
The "muñíste" unite a battering ram to break down the door from the inside.
Defense Pact Signed
Truman Authorizes Arms Supplies Says Program Is One To Deter Against War Plans By JAMES E. ROPER WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 (PU) - The United States today signed final agreements with eight North Atlantic Pact signatory countries, under which they will receive U.S. armaments valued at $1 billion for common defense against possible Russian aggression. The agreements strengthened the North Atlantic Defense Pact, which was ratified by Congress last year and is the closest peacetime alliance ever entered into by the United States. President Truman set the program in motion immediately with an executive order to Secretary of State Dean Acheson, giving him the green light to proceed with the structuring of an "integrated defense in the North Atlantic community". In a statement accompanying his executive order, the President hailed the North Atlantic Treaty as an instrument "of deterrence to aggression" that will succeed by strengthening "close cooperation among U.S. nations determined to remain so." "One For All" The" mutual aid" agreement" signed today provided for the delivery as soon as possible of armaments valued" at one billion dollars. The first shipments will leave on March 1. The arms" Iran will go to Great Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, Holland, Luxemburg, Denmark and Norway. Each of the countries has promised to use the armaments sent by the United States to prepare its defenses against a possible Soviet attack. They also promised, under the historic "one for all and all for one" pact, to help each other with strategic bases and materials, which they can dispose of without harming their economic systems. Approved Defense Plans In approving the agreements, Mr. Truman also announced that he had approved the common defense plans prepared by a committee of the group of nations and endorsed" on January 6 by the North Atlantic Council. "I have approved them because I am confident that they provide for the establishment of an integrated defense of the North Atlantic community," he said. At the same time, the President cautioned that defense plans cannot aer "static" and have to be constantly revlaadoa in light of changing circumstances to allow for "maximum coordination of efforts at all times." Special Pact with England The Congregation voted military aid after a protracted struggle. It stipulated that armaments could not be delivered until the President approved a common defense plan. One of the largest shipments is expected to be that of B-29 bombers for Britain. The agreements vary in their details, but all specifically state that the weapons are for "the integrated defense of the North Atlantic community." The pact with Britain, which delayed the final agreement for several months, allows the transfer of U.S. weapons to other areas, such as the Red Chinese-threatened colony of Hong Kong, as long as the U.K. replaces them in the equipment.
Parking On San Juan Sidewalks Continues
- 2 1 i ¿ 1 I K
Two scenes on the Prolongación de la calle Recinto Sur, on San Juan. In amha" I can see the parking of cars, mobile on both sides of the street, with vehicles on both sides of the street, with vehicles on both sides of the street, with vehicles on both sides of the street.
street, with vehicles on the sidewalks. In the photo above you can see a senator's car mounted on the sidewalk; in the one below, another vehicle. After some time ago "eñalára.
moa a similar situation some time ago, the police were diligent in enforcing the ordinance. Apparently it has become - the mlsmaa. (Photo EL MUNDO)
Eight Assembly Members Named For Coamo Believe That With Governor's Action Conflict Is Resolved Yesterday afternoon the Governor named as members of the Coamo Municipal Assembly Mrs. Angelita González de Pizarro, and 1 Messrs. Ramón Rolón Miranda, Francisco A. Norat. Andrés C. Rivera, Ramón C. Dávlla, Francisco A. Santini, Alonso Ruhéu and Julio Zayas. With these appointments the municipal government of Coamo, which for the last half year has been led by an interim mayor and only one assemblyman, is complete. The other assembly members have submitted their resignations to the Governor, at the request of the leadership of the Popular Party to which they belonged as a means to try to solve the divergences between the mayor-elect, sefior Carlos Vázquez Vélez and the Municipal Assembly. The Governor named the day before yesterday the sefior Hermógenes Pérez for mayor, and by naming yesterday the members" of the Municipal Assembly all the vacancies in the government of that municipality were "covered". The new mayor and the new assembly members were endorsed (Continued on Page 16¿-Col. 8)
More Than 50 Percent Fail In High School Exam Only 158 Candidate* Passed the* Test* Offered By Instruction Under New Law P<ir BENJAMIN "ANTANA Editor of EL MUNDO More than half of those who submitted failed - the prqebas Ubre" offered by the Department of Instruction, to receive a high school diploma, in accordance with Law Number 170.
One of the most complicated and rare cases took place in the town of Lares on January 25, when the body of veteran Antonio Teliado Garcia, 30 years old, remained unburied for more than 24 hours, because no one could be found to certify the cause of death. According to the information provided by the brother of the fa? Juan Tellado, and the treasurer of the local chapter of the American Legion, aefior Arturo T. Irizarry, the veteran Antonio Tellado, resident* of Barrio Latorre, (Continued on page 16. Col. 6)
-May 4, 1949. Some 158 passed the "els exams offered by the Department in Ponce and San Juan, covering English, Spanish, mathematics, social studies and natural sciences. More than 1,000 persons over 25 years of age applied for the benefits of the law, but only 521 were finally accepted, after satisfying the necessary requirements. Of the 531 accepted, only 415 appeared at the testing centers, but of these, nine dropped out after starting the tests. Of the 406 who took the tests, 248 failed and 158 passed, including 25 females and 133 males between the ages of 25 and 60. The Commissioner of Instruction, senior Mariano Villiaronga, said that most of the top universities in the United States and Puerto Rico require that the candidate for admission to the university must have a 2.00 grade point average.)
Failure With Moscow
Russians Mistreated Berliners
From the book, THE BERLIN COMMAND By Brigadier General FRANK HOWLEY- Former Commander of the American Sector of Berlin N. of the R.-East e" "I fifth of twelve articles" by General Howley taken" from his book, THE BERLIN COMMAND, just published". i Howley was successfully engaged in the advertising business before" joining the Army. He started in the "Army" with the rank of captain and rose to the position of brigadier-general. Tenas, brilliant, dealt with the "Russian" for four "flo" in Berlin. What he does not" refer in "this" article" about "the" "ovietlcoM" not "theory," "fact". Fact" that he learned through a hard experience dealing intimately with ruthless men, from 1945 to 1848, A "CIVILIZED" ARMY After his capture, Berlin became a" second Nankin, with the difference that" it was not Japanese but Russians who raped women, murdered and plundered.
There was no discipline or control. All ranks, officers and soldiers, took part in these barbarities. That is a" serious charge against an army that is supposed to belong to a civilized " country, but we can prove our accusation. Probably revenge played a major motive in the savagery of the Russians. A Russian general admitted to me that cases of rape did not benefit the reputation of the Red Army. "But," he added apologetically, "they are nothing compared to what the Germans did to us." - The Russians raped women and plundered without restraint for two months before our arrival, and continued to raid inside the American sector long after our arrival, until we gave birth to them. A former secretary of mine, a 17-year-old girl, had to be taken from her home to the hospital in a nlfios car after seven Russians had raped and molested her and her mother in the apartment where they lived in Steglltz. The Russian soldiers paid in front of the house
The Russian soldiers paid at the house, climbed in through the window and attacked the two women, and returned several times during the afternoon to perform the same operation. This is one of many such cases. In a single day two hundred and thirty German girls - all victims of Russian lust and brutality - were treated in a Berlin hospital. Cruel Assassination Rape was inevitably accompanied by murder and looting. The wife of an important municipal official was murdered by a Russian who entered her house asking for something in Russian. It seems that he wanted the keys to the kitchen, because he broke the kitchen door, but the lady did not understand him. She thought he was asking for her paperwork and showed him her ID card. Turned into a fury the soldier wielded his pistols and shot her through the head, while shouting, ":car|v llstal, capitalist!" The ofilcalM and Russian soldiers seized everything they saw, especially djnero, jewelry and silverware. When we arrived (Continued on page 16- Col L)
Police Ordered To Pursue Island-wide Looting
Salvage of battleship Misuri To Resume Today Work To Pull It Out Of Mud Suspended Yesterday Due To Bad Weather NORFOLKTVirgirüaTenero 27 (P. U.)- Bad weather today caused the Navy to abandon operations to undock the giant battleship Misuri. A Navy spokesman said it is hoped salvage work can be resumed tomorrow. North-northeasterly winds, d t 20 to 25 miles per hour, with gales of forty miles per hour, lashed the Hampton Roads area. Visibility was very poor and the sea was rough, Meanwhile, the Navy continued to receive suggestions from admirals Me "fresh water". She was very busy, but found time to review some of the suggestions received through the mail. One letter signed by a "sincere American" suggested* that helium balloons be placed on the "side" of the battleship. The purpose is to maneuver the frame like a blimp and free it from its muddy prison. The Navy declined to comment on the suggestion. Another "sweet water admiral" suggested that the entire crew be placed at the stern and jump in unison. Secret Agents Make Arrests After Buying Bills 4 NEW YORK, N.Y., Jan. 27 (PU). -Federal authorities announced today that one of the country's most powerful counterfeiting syndicates was busted because the careless swindlers sold some of their counterfeit bills to Secret Service agents. And on top of all that, the counterfeiters "duped their customers" from the Secret Service, giving them less change, officials said. Four shoulders were arrested in this city and one in Los Angeles, where the "agents" were forced to follow in the gang's footsteps. Two Los Angeles agents arrived in New York on Monday with sixty thousand dollars, posing as buyers. They contacted the "Indicato and offered to buy $300,000 in "faUlficado" bills at the going rate of twenty cents on the dollar. U.S. Attorney Irvlng Saypol said the" agent" negotiated for two" days, going Wednesday night to the home of Anthony Chiarella, thirty-three sfios. Saypol added that the gang agreed to sell $300,000 to the agents in counterfeit $10 and $20 bills, stipulating that the money had to be spent in the Far East, not in the United States. The agents' legitimate sixty thousand was exchanged for the counterfeit $300,000 at a downtown hotel, and the counterfeiters were arrested on the spot. When the counterfeit money was counted (Continued on Page 16-Col. 5)
Capt. Arroyo Asks 'Strong Hand' Responds To Toledo's Request* Give Credit to the Press By RJJRÍCO E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO In response to "a request from the Public Service Commission, the Acting Chief of the Island Police has issued a circular requesting the Uniformed to pay more attention to the situation of the bargaining of the buses" of the Transportation Authority, denounced by the Press lately. In a letter to Coronel Salvador T. Rolg. Salvador T. Rolg., Lic. Jorge V. Toledo. Toledo, Chairman of the Public Service Commission, informs him that "the press has been criticizing on a daily basis the bargaining that the bus operators of the Transportation Authority have been sustaining in open violation of the regulatory provision of Section 17, Subsection (o) of the Regulations Applicable to Motor Vehicles". The aforementioned section provides that "no operator operating within the limits of an urban area may pass any other bus in idle speed until it stops to pick up or drop off passengers for any other justified cause. Amenosa a Seguridad Pública In its fine paragraph!!!, if licenciado Toledo expresses to the Chief the Unlfos> msda that "as said bargaining conotltuy* a threat or 1" public safety, I respectfully sollcltd him to instruct the force under his command to proceed to denounce any infraction to said regulation." In the communication sent by the Acting Chief of Police, Captain Guillermo Arroyo, to the Zone Commander, Dlitrlto Commanders and Chiefs of the Island Police, he requests that the Ja Commission's order be extended not only in the routes of the Transportation Authority, but also in all the routes of the island. "We have extended the letter of reference," says Captain Arroyo, "not only to the routes covered by the Transport Authority, but also to the other routes of the Island served by this class of vehicles, so that you may instruct and see that the personnel under your order pay greater attention to the situation denounced by the press in this respect. "Undoubtedly," Captain Arroyo further points out, "that e! bargaining brings dire consequences for public safety. Not only is traffic interrupted by bargaining, but even more serious. The "e cause crashes and accidents" that annually cost the lives of many people on the island of Puerto Rico, in addition to others who are seriously injured. Strong Hand Finally, Captain Arroyo says that "the Police must act with a strong hand against those who, without causing the serious risk caused by bargaining, violate the provisions of the above-transcribed regulation." EL MUNDO Denounced Haggling As is common knowledge, EL MUNDO denounced in past editions" the situation of haggling among the buses of the Transportation Authority. EL MUNDO published a report on ¡ *1 system of payment to the drivers ¡ of the Transportation Authority, a system that it considered provoked haggling and congestion of the buses to the detriment of the good service that should be provided to the community, as well as the safety guarantees that should be offered to them. TRANSIT DENUNCIATIONS REACH 14,526 In the course of Botamente three months - October, November and December of 1M0 - were denounced" 14,528 pereenaa by different vIolaclooM to lea Leyee do Transito, do agreement with a report sent to the Ib Public Relations Office" of the Police Inaulnr. Of BMM 14,528 denunciation". 5,878 correaponden - 1" are" metropolitan San Juan and . í Río Piedra". The most common violations, according to the report, are legal driving with 1,888; obstruction of traffic with 1,486; unlicensed driver with 1,280; parking in prohibited places with 1,084; driving without a driver's license with 939; and passenger exemption with 672.