THE NfiNDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly cloudy today and into the evening with scattered showers in the afternoon, IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 82 degrees; low, VI degrees. Barometric preoton at sea level. at" 4:80 o'clock in the afternoon, 29.91 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, April M. (PU). - This afternoon m reported the* following* temperature": New* York, Mi Chicago 41; Wáahlngton, 74; Miami, 88. Forecast" for" tomorrow at Num York and neighboring* cludade": con-kterablMnente cloudy and ealttrooo. Toaaporatnro ateten, oana d" M áTontoo variable* from the Boot.
MORNING
MORNING
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ARC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
ANNUAL XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY APRIL 29, 19S0
NUMBER 14003
FIVE CENTS
Puerto Rico Case Arises In Hearing On Alaska I . * &
Fernós Asks For More Bows To Island Proposes U. S. "Ship" On Foreign "Route. On Foreign Route" Can Stop" Here For Paul Harrison WASHINGTON .April 28 (PU) - Resident Commissioner Dr. Antonio Fernós Isern of Puerto Rico yesterday proposed that Congress change U.S. shipping laws to allow more passenger service between Puerto Rico and the mainland. Appearing before the U.S. Merchant Marine Subcommittee, Fernos proposed that any time the President discovers that passenger service is inadequate, he could allow U.S. ships on foreign routes to call on Puerto Rico without losing their subsidies, or even allow foreign-registered ships to call on the island. More service is needed, he said, to accommodate tourists and business travelers. Puerto Rico falls under the jurisdiction of the cabotage shipping laws. Under these, only ships flying the U.S. flag may establish trade between the mainland and Puerto Rico. Those ships that do establish such trade may not receive any shipping subsidies. Subsidio" Par" Barcos Ferjtos proposed last year that Congress provide subsidies" for coastal shipping activities" at least on the routes" to Puerto Rico, but the military branch of the government recommended against this proposal. As a matter of fact, Femó said that the geographical position of Puerto Rico was such that it would be logical to remove the island entirely from the jurisdiction of the cabotage laws. But instead of asking for that, he said, he made his proposal yesterday in the form of something akin to a "compromise. Subcommittee Chairman Warran G. Magnuson, D-Washington, noted that Aldaka is facing difficult shipping problems and said it might be possible to consider the Puerto Rico problem after the Alaska problem is studied. Studies have shown, Femó" said, that half of the people traveling between Puerto Rico and the mainland would prefer to travel by sea if facilities were available. Traffic during this year will probably reach 126,000 individual travelers, he said, so the potential shipping traffic would be 63,000 people. But while four passenger ships with facilities of 53,000 cabins a year traveled to Puerto Rico before the war, he said, there is now only one ship with an annual capacity of only 7,000 cabins. Femó" afftadló that a number of (Continued on Page, 18-Col. 4>
Ledo. Varona and Co-defendants Guilty - M./ J WK '
Statehood To Be Judged On Merits Anderson Says Tala Progress Has Impressed Member" Of Senate By WIUJAM R. HATCH WASHINGTON, April 28 (PU) - - Senators said today that any application for statehood in Puerto Rico will be judged on its own merits, and not according to any precedent. The question arose in hearings of the Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee on the bill to admit Alaska *to the Union as a state. W. C. Arnold, a lawyer representing Alaskan pejquero interests, opposed statehood for the territory on the ground that it might induce the people of Puerto Rico and Guam to apply for statehood. Senator Clinton P. Anderson, Democrat of New Mexico, chairman of the committee during the illness of Senator Joseph C. O'Mahoney, said the precedent would not be a determining factor, "! Guam and Puerto Rico make "olld; tudes d" statehood. Incldentalment," he added, "we are very impressed" by "J progress in Puerto Rico." Arnold claimed that" the approval of 1* eatadity for Alaska will transform into a precedent 1" ere-, in that" 1the Incorporation of territories such as Alaska and Hawaii implies that they have the right" to convtrUne into states, If the precedent is established with Alaska," he said, "Puerto Rico and Guam, deipués that have been incorporated, would have the inherent right, and Congress would not be in a position to reject their petitions for statehood. Arnold then argued that the distinction between incorporated and unincorporated territory was made by a person fearful of the admission of Guam and Puerto Rico into the Union on racial grounds. Senator Glen H. Taylor, Democrat of Idaho, said he was sure that Congress never had such discrimination in mind. At this point, Senator Herbert Lehman, Democrat of New York, intervened to say that ""if Puerto Rico were to apply for statehood I would pay careful attention to it,'' he went on to say that he would insist that a proposition of that nature be sympathetically considered. Hlr© IJamamleuto Lehman recently appealed to the senator to give "serious and sympathetic consideration to Resident Commissioner Fernó" hern's proposal that Puerto Rico be allowed to draft its own constitution. He later told the United Press (Continued on Page 18-Col. i)
José A. Varona Pacheco (left) is shown here at the time he climbed the steps of the Federal Court in I" maltona yesterday, to appear for sentencing, accompanied by the bailiffs of the Court, Ramón M. Alonso and Diego Martínez. Alonso and Diego Martinez. Mr. Varona Pacheco was "entenclsdn to serve seven years in prison, having been found guilty of the crimes of introducing counterfeit bills into Puerto Rico and conspiring with another" to put them into circulation. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
Sentenced to Prison Yesterday by Federal Court Judge
Jaime Durand, in Last Minute Statement Describes How Counterfeit "Billete" Tickets Entered Puerto Rico
By CAELO" NIEVE" RIVERA Staff Writer of EL MUNDO.
Judge Davlf Chávez, of the Federal Court, yesterday imposed seven years" imprisonment to Ledo. Jose A. Varona Pacheco, six and a half years to each of the co-defendants Ellas G. Lnpés and Aristides Lube, Sierra, and one and one-half to Hilario Santiago, sus- 1 *------ ---
At half past eleven o'clock in the morning the defendants Varona, Lepé", Lube Sierra and Hilario Santiago entered the federal court, guarded by three bailiffs. When a few minutes later Judge Chavez took the stand, all the defendants, when called for the reading of sentence, lined up between the public and the mass of prosecutor's work, fjopás and Varona were the most serene of the group: Lube Sierra was more somber than before, with his brow furrowed and his face stern, while Santiago had the same worried, but serene, appearance as always. i (Continued on 1" Page 18-Col. 1>
VPR Graduates Active in the City NEW YORK, April 28 (Special to EL MUNDO)-The New York chapter of the Association of Graduates of the University of Puerto Rico was formed last night at the offices of the Government of Puerto Rico in this city, the convocation was made from Puerto Rico by Mr. J. F. Maura, director of the Association of Graduates of the University of Puerto Rico. Said call was sent through the Director of the Puerto Rico Government Office in New York, Mr. Manuel Cabranes, (Continued on Page 18-Col. 6) I
High School Students Riot in New York . ■
Loa Estudiantes do Escuela Superior hace tros días que están revueltos - insisten en marchar hasta la Alcaidía do Nueva York pars protestar ants si alcalde William O'Dwyer por la suspensión do sus actividades eurricularea, debido que loe masetroo ne quieren atondar a "Um á n m les paga por oi Maja -otra" la la pateeMM -¿x . flh
r" photograph we see a group of vociferous protesters surrounding a car they blew up during a demonstration near City Hall. In the center one we see a mounted policeman tightly grabbing by the jacket of a student revoltee©, they lie "te teten te enteta, U tetema te m-"n la pete" h j
tet te te enteta, U tetema te m-"n la pete" h j student. In the last photograph remo" a student qu" cao almost under the laa kicka of an oabell© of 1© Police, miontro" Seta demAB try to ponera© to safety from the attack to ©Mir them to dtsparaarwo. Xm aatudlanteo have made repeated" ecfueraoo by achieving MteteteM toa the AlaaMe, Lee Maten" m atete a tebaJar tata te te te .
r" d" laa hour" nórmale" of teaching work, to the not te le" pay hour" extra. This situation has forced the" authority"" school* d* city - cancel all" 1m activities <whidiantUes such* as fe*. b* 11 *' pa""ii "a and excursions, in the" which requires the preoatea do asaeteo* |m aoompaflon a tea ostadiantea. (Fotoa P. A.)
Automobile Falls into the Caño From the Báscula Bridge.
> ■ H
.ente automobile fell into the water from the Báaeula Bridge on Highway Number 2 at 10:18 p.m. on Thursday night. The driver said that another
the vehicle then crashed into one of the bridge's railings, which broke, causing the car to fall into the water. (EL MUNDO)
A car heading towards Bayamon collided with the railing of the weighbridge, going into the water.... Last night at 10:15 P. M. the car 18,209 of the Texas ' Yale Professor was killed in Indonesia also correspondent of Life Magazine. - Work of Terrorists JAKARTA, Indonesia, April 28 (?. U,)- Terrorists in Indonesian Army uniforms ambushed and murdered a Yale University professor and a Life magazine correspondent on a lonely Java road today. The victims were identified by Colonel Karl W. Hi "gen, U.S. military trlmer on the Indonesian United Nations Commission, as Professor Raymond Kennedy and correspondent Robert Doyle. Authoritative reports from Bandoeng said that four of five terrorists stopped the jeep in which the two Americans were traveling, forcing them about two hundred yards off the road, where they shot them dead. Nearby villagers were forced at gunpoint to bury the bodies. The terrorists took the Jeep and another car following it towards Cheribon. Early reports did not say whether the occupants of the second vehicle were killed, kidnapped or released, Bodies Identified Villagers called authorities, who exhumed the bodies, Doylo was identified first. Authorities said the documents found on the other body left no doubt that it was Kennedy. It is known that the stolen Jeep belonged to Kennedy. Hlsgen said he learned of the killings at Indonesian Army headquarters, adding that Kennedy and Doylo were on their way from Jakarta to Jogjakarta when they encountered the terrorists. (Continued on p. 18. col, 5.)
Co. driven by Rafael Martinez Rivera, 42 years old, headed from San Juan to Bayamon on the old highway, when approached by another vehicle, collided with the guardrail of the weighbridge, according to allegations.
The vehicle was submerged and fell into the water, according to Martinez. The vehicle was submerged, until only the hood was visible, (Continued on Page 18-Cp. 4).
French Cabinet Decrees Expulsion of F. Joliot Curie French Atomic Studies Chief Claimed He Would Not Fight Against Russia - Will Make Announcement PoTrÉNe" balbaud PARIS, April 28 (PU). - The Government dismissed the High Commissioner of the French Atomic Energy Program, Dr. Fretfrlc Joliot Curie, of Communist affiliation, on the grounds that he constitutes a danger to the security of the Western world. The centrist coalition Cabinet - ■■ - - ■ ■■■ -
which is chaired by Georges Bidault of the Mouvement Républicain Populaire took this decision this afternoon. The corresponding announcement was read out by Information Minister Paul Henri Teltgen. The Government's announcement said that Bidault regretted having been forced to take such a step, He stressed, however, that whatever his (Joliot Curie's) scientific merits, his public and political speeches and his acceptance of the resolution passed by the Communist Congress of Genevllilers made it impossible to keep him in office, The decision came into force immediately. The members of the Assembly said that the prospect of dismissal of the fifty-year-old man of science, who proclaimed that he would never help a war against Russia, was discussed at a cabinet meeting last Monday, It is well known that the United States is especially concerned about the fact that a man with such an ideology is the French High Commissioner for Atomic Research and Development, although North American secrets are not shared with France. The Prime Minister himself, Georges Bidault, is said to be in favor of dismissing Joliot Curie. He visited Moscow at the end of 1949 and distinguished himself in communist politics and philo-communist organizations. He praised Russia, but Joliot Curie was in evidence from the point of view ofi(Continued on p. 18-Col. 8).
Group to See Charges Formed Alvarez V. Gutierrez Franqui Chairs It. - Víctor Gutiérrez Franqui was appointed Chairman of the Permanent Legislative Commission before which the charges filed by the Governor against Mayor Augusto P. Alvarez, of the municipality of Rio Piedras, are to be heard. Benjamin Ortlz was appointed as Vice Chairman and Lionel Fernández Méndez as Secretary. Yesterday afternoon, the Permanent Legislative Commission met in private session in the caucus room of the House, at the Island Capitol, to adopt the regulations that will govern the hearings to be held to substantiate the charges filed by Governor Muftoz Marín against the Mayor of Rio Piedras, Augusto P. Alvarez. The Commission decided to meet on a day, not yet specified, of next week, date on which it will begin its sessions to enter fully into the consideration of the charges. In this regard, it was deliberating yesterday, when it met in its (Continued on Page 18-Col. 8)
Hiring of Workers May Continue
Will Cover Quota For New Jersey Labor Department Warns Dangers Of Leaving Without Contract *" By S. Gálvéz Maturana Pedactor of EL MUNDO As of next Monday the sending of Puerto Rican workers to work under contract with the Garden State Service Association, whose program has been paralyzed by the Labor Commissioner, Fernando Sierra Berdecla, may continue. Blas Oliveras, Labor Commissioner. He reported yesterday that the firm has posted the $10,000 bond required by the Department as a guarantee for the hiring of 1,000 farm workers. Until this quota is covered the firm may continue to send men to the Continent. Should they need more laborers," continued Mr. Oliveras, "they will be required to give a new bond at the rate of $10 for each laborer hired, in accordance with the provisions issued by the Commissioner of Labor. Background* The shipment of Irahajadore* to the United States was stopped by the Labor Commissioner because Mr. Voorhees, who negotiated *1 contract on behalf of the Garden State Service Association, was unable to furnish the bond required as security for the performance of the contract. At the insistence of Mr. Voorhee* to allow his representative in Puerto Rico, Mr. Pedro Nido, to initiate the contracting and prompt shipment of the contract. At the insistence of Senior Voorhee* to allow his representative in Puerto Rico, Mr. Pedro Nido, to begin the hiring and prompt shipment of the workers to New Jersey, the Commissioner of Labor authorized Mr. Nido to hire and send the first three hundred and ten men, who left for that area on Tuesday and Wednesday of last week. In view of the fact that the bond was not "on loan", the Commissioner of Labor made an announcement stopping the shipment of laborers to the New Jersey area until the bond was duly filed in the name of the Graden State Service Association or the other employers' cooperatives represented by that entity. (Continued on page 5) Muñoz Munoz Marfn has issued a proclamation declaring May 14 as Mother's Day, as provided for in Act 25 of 1915. The proclamation in question reads as follows: 'Whereas, the second Sunday of May of each year has been designated as Mother's Day in Puerto Rico by Law number 25 of 1915, in which the Governor is charged with reminding the people of said day. "Therefore. I, Luis Muftoz Marin, Governor of Puerto Rico, am hereby pleased to remind all the inhabitants of this Island that Sunday, May 14, is hereby fixed by law as Mother's Day this affto. to pay homage to the people of Puerto Rico on this day.