THE h>NDO
WEATHER FORECAST FOR THE WAVE. BOY: _ Medium cloudy with considerable high cloudiness and isolated showers during the afternoon and evening. IN ST JOHN'S, YESTERDAY: - Temperatun. mAxlma, 68 degrees: minimum, 66 degrees. Barometric pressure - at sea level, at 4:80 o'clock, SI M inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, Dec. 15.(FU). - In the afternoon today the" -igpiente* temperatures worms ron: New York, ": Chicago, 18; Wáahington, 45; Mía- ¿ mi, 80. Forecast" for tomorrow in New" York and neighboring cities: clear and cold, eon ta maximum temperature in the" 80 degrees.
DIARIO MARAÑA
"beats
THE FIRST NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
- PRIMERA YDIlOXr
USE XXXI
. l,aM Fort Office, Ran Juan, F. Ib
SAN JJUAN. PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, DECEMBER 16, 1950
NUMBER 14233
Allies Repel First Chinese Onslaught Against Defense Line Near Hungnam ' o
Boricua's Acts Of Heroism Cited - - 1
Army Awards Medals of Honor For Exploits Under Enemy Fire Against Communists Puerto Rican soldiers fighting in Korea are receiving recognition from the U.S. Congress and the nation's armed forces for acts of heroism and displays of valor on the war front. In the citations released yesterday by the offices of the Military Department of the Antilles in San Juan, the heroism displayed by young Puerto Ricans in difficult war operations, unknown until now in Puerto Rico, during the advance and counteroffensive of the UN forces in Korea, in which the 65th Infantry Regiment participated, was recognized. The honors bestowed by Congress and the Armed Forces correspond to the following soldiers of the 5th Infantry and other units in military service: Star of in posthumous tribute to Private Juan Cruz Alicea, who was killed in action last October 17 as a component of Company E of the 65th Infantry. Bronze Star to 1st Lieutenant Abort E. Carioly, of Company E of the 5th Infantry, for heroic service. Bronze Star to first lieutenant Joe A. Font, for acts of heroism, of the 27th Regiment of the Vlgé "mloqulnt" Division. He has already received the Purple Heart Medal. Bronze Star to Corporal Saúl López del Toro, of the 65th Infantry Headquarters Company, for acts of heroism. Bronze Star to Corporal Angel Torres, of the Service Company of the 65th Infantry, for act" of heroism. Bronco Star to Corporal Maximiliano Velazquez, 65th Infantry Service Company. Citation Details > The citation, awarded the Silver Star posthumously, states that "during an enemy attack on his unit near Slngl-Dong, Korea, on October 17, 1950, Private Cruz Alicer was seriously wounded. Nevertheless, he continued in the line of battle, inspiring his comrades to continue the fight with determination. On one occasion, because of his alertness, he discovered the enemy infiltrating the lines, - he fired rapidly, directing the fire of his comrades so effectively that the infiltration was stopped. His devotion to duty and his remarkable skill as a soldier uphold the highest traditions of the United States Army. This compatriot entered Army service in Puerto Rico. His widow is Doña Consuelo, and resides at La Guaira street, Orocovis, Silver Star The Silver Star also awarded to Major - Lieutenant Albert -JE. Carsoly. He is attached to Company E of the 65th Infantry Regiment, on Korea. The citation states that "at about 6:15 a.m. on the morning of October 17 last, Lieutenant Carsoly's Company E was attacked by a large enemy force. Some troops had already infiltrated the perimeter of his unit. Abandoning his cap at the beginning of the attack, Carsely killed an enemy soldier who stood 20 paces from him or immodestly organized and distributed his forces and mortar personnel, and despite the intensity of the fight, skillfully and effectively directed the fire. Even though the early stage of the enemy attack contributed to the confusion, Lieutenant Carsoly was able in a short time and with few casualties to overwhelm the enemy force, killing and capturing 64 of the enemy". 8o acknowledges on the citation his '.'valor, leadership and military skill, which reflects a credit'to the American Army." Lt. Carsoly entered the Army in New Mexico, and was assigned to the 65th Infantry Regiment, 1 Lt. Jos A. Font - Lt. Joe A. Font, the son of Army Lt. Font, son of Mr. William A. Font and wife, of Santurce, received the Purple Heart Medal on August 24, last for wounds received "on war campaign. He has now been awarded the Bro'nco Star for heroic action on the batting field. This Puerto Rican officer was, until recently, serving with (Continued on page 16, CoL 3)
Borícuos Leen Carta" de tu" Homes
First class senior officer Ramon Vsletfn Crus (left) and first class officer Antonio Ramos, both from Mayagües, read the letter* received from their homes in Puerto Rico at the North Hamhung aros in North Korea. - (Photo, Acodada Press). Sierra Bevdecía ge Solidariza , With Permanent Union to E.. U, Says He First Believed in Ideal Separate Independence, But Opinion Has Varied Since 1940 In-relation to Governor Muñoz Marin's pronouncement, favoring the permanent union of Puerto Rico with the United States," Labor Commissioner, Mr. Fernando Sierra Berdeda, said yesterday. - , . - Mr. Sierra pronounced himself in solidarity with the permanent union, explaining at the same time the reasons* 1 *■ 1 ;
for it. " Commissioner of Labor, Mr. F. Sierra Berdeda. said, "The week patada United Press requested of me in Wáshlñgton a co- . ment it for THE JMUhfDO with respect to the statements of Don Luis M)ifloz Marín expressing his conviction that Puerto Rico 'should continue to be part of this great cooperative of peoples (United States) under a common permanent citizenship*. I have not had the opportunity to read Governor Muñoz's statements. I indicated to the United Press that I would make my comments after reading these statements, upon my return to Ida. My comments are as follows: "From, 1932 - when the 1 Liberal Party was founded and intervened for the first time at the polls - until 1938 - when the Popular Democratic Party began to be formed, to intervene at the polls in 1940 - together with Don Luis Muñoz Marín and other distinguished comrades, I maintained within the Liberal Party and publicly, with persistence, that the final political solution for the case of Puerto Rico was independence separate from the United States. "The people of Puerto Rico were divided into two groups: One that advocated independence from the United States and the other that advocated independence from the United States and the United States.
Secret Service Office Wanted Here Request Included In New Assignment, Urgent Opening Declared By ELIZABETH WHARTON WASHINGTON Dec. 15 (PU) - The U.S. Secret Service plans to establish a permanent office in Puerto Rico as a result of the recent attempt on President Trumsn's life, it was reported today. U.E. Baughman, chief of the Secret Service Division, made the request when he appeared before the House Appropriations Committee last week. His testimony was made public today. Baughman's request cited included in a proposed supplemental appropriation of $82,000 to name 27 agents" adl<Continued on page 13, Col. 31
Vidal Santiago And Gregorio Hernandez Rivera Are Sent To Prison
Juan Vidal Santiago Dias, 11der nationalist by trade bars boro, who shot at members of the National Guard and the Police of Barrio Obrero, was arrested yesterday by orders of the prosecutor Ernesto Micros Calimano. Prosecutor Mieras Calimano on the news that Santiago Dias was about to be discharged from the Municipal Hospital, issued two arrest warrants against him: one for the crime of assault with bail of 25,000 pesos and another one for assault on life, with 110,000 pesos. In addition, the Prosecutor extended him another accusation for infraction to the Law of Registration of Weapons, fixing him another bail of 81,000. The prosecutor accuses Santiago Días of having killed the citizen Angel Moléndos Pantoja and of having attempted against the life of the Insular policeman Agustín Malavé. The facts, according to the prosecutor, occurred on October 31, when Santiago Dias was in the barbershop where he was in a gunfight with the police and island policemen, and was wounded.
The prosecutor M loros Calimano, after extending the arrest warrants against Santiago Días, appointed Lieutenant Ro* serio Loyola to carry them out, when the accused was discharged yesterday at the Municipal Hospital of La Capita). This was done, admitting the accused to jail. Another defendant, "Gregorio Homándos Rivera, who was wounded when he attacked the Fortalosa in the Nationalist assault on October 31 last, was also admitted yesterday to the San Juan District Jail. Boto was discharged from the Municipal Hospital of the Capital, after being cured of the serious wounds he received during the attack to the Executive Mansion. Homándos Rivera was taken on that occasion from a mobile car, after the shooting. The Fleca! General Special, Lic. Jose C. Aponto, reported that he had ordered the committal to jail of Her* nítido" Rivera for alleged crimes of assault but committing Moolnato, setting bail of 133,000 pesos each.
E. U. To Cite Unions For Contempt Railroad" Strike Extends Strike Military Spokesmen Say Illegal Strikes Delay Shipments Korea By Robert E. LEE WASHINGTON, Dec. 15 (P. U.)-The Government today was preparing contempt citations against striking railroad unions and military spokesmen said today that growing illegal strikes are delaying vital shipments of steel and food" for troops" in Korea. The strikes have disrupted the postal service at the height of the Christmas mailing season and vital officials said they may extend last night's embargo on postal packages and other bulk mail beyond the 15 states in the Northeast and Midwest affected by the original order. Some members of Congress criticized the railroad employees for initiating the strikes in the midst of an international crisis, and demanded the passage of drastic legislation to deal with the situation. Attorney General J. Howard McGraih ordered the attorneys for the Department of Justice to issue subpoenas"" against the Chicago- one of the nation's railroad junctions-and in Cleveland, where the headquarters of the unions are located. The strike has not extended to Cleveland, D" be convicted of contempt, the railroad unions would have to pay heavy fines and the" leader" could "er imprisoned." However, it was doubtful that the Government would be able to obtain the contempt citations because the unions claim they are doing everything in their power to get employees back to work. The government failed in a similar attempt against the John L. Lewis miners during last winter's mining strike when U.S. District Judge Richmond B. Keech ruled that the government had failed to prove that the leaders had acted in an unconstitutional manner.
By Benjamin Santano Editor of EL MUNDO The problem of teachers' pensions and salaries will be one of the main issues to be considered at the teachers' meeting on December 27 and 28. Numerous delegations propose that the Puerto Rico Teachers Association formally present to the Island Legislature the following alternative: That they be paid their "decent" salaries,
Mediators Begin Truce Work Conferring With Ernest Gross Later to Hold Talks With Group Sent by Red China By RTCHABD~WITKIN FLUSHING, New York, Dec. 15. - (PU) - The three United Nations mediators today began the difficult work of bringing about a suspension of hostilities in Korea, conferring with the official representative of General Douglas MacAr'thur's forces, the mediation group - the president of the General Assembly, General Naarollah (of Iran), and the President of the United Nations General Assembly, General Douglas MacAr'thur. Naarollah (of Iran), the Indo-Atanian Sir Senegal Rau, and the Canadian Foreign Minister, Leater B. Pearaon ralmorzaron ralmorzaron with the delegate nortéame rlcano Erneat A. Groas, pnra to collect the views of the United Nations Unified Command, led by State" United", around the ímma to achieve the cessation, of fighting, It was not immediately announced when the Irlo will have its first session with the Beijing envoy Wu Hslu Chuan - session that will give the key to the success or failure of the mediation effort. Focó after dd noon, the .plane gives the Assembly ended its agency, except for the Issues of the Far Orlente, Most 4a thisa eatán before.la Political Commission, which will remain in session Indefinitely as a' kind of Assembly, and which will reconvene on Monday morning. . Rau Chairs Another Group The other remaining group which may play a yltal role in any Far East settlement - the seven-nation committee on Chinese representation - held its first meeting today, electing Rau chairman. It is possible that the trio of mediators may be able to use the powers of! the group on Chinese representation, as a- means of gaining acceptance of the suspension of hostilities by the Chinese Communists. The members of the group are: India, Canada, Poland. Ecuador, Mexico, Irac and the Philippines. It is supposed to make recommendation is (Continued on page 16, Coi. 6)
Truman Says He Feels Human Flakiness i JK" 5 ' ' ' ' í' i / ; i President Truman embraces his daughter Margaret, during 1" Glabr a' clan gives lunch for "Father and Hlja", at the National Pregnancy Club", in Wishing ton. This was the first time emboa appeared together in public since the President threatened music critic Paul Hume (Frene" Associate Photo).
WASHINGTON, Dec. 15. -(PUL-President Truman admitted today that he sometimes has difficulty in keeping his "weaknesses" as a human being from interfering with his work as Chief Executive.
There Will Be Treg Millione Army By Mid-June House Committee Approved 816,845,000,000,000,000,000,No Plans to Mobilize National Guard Yet
ex- n es- Ol
Teachers' Assembly to Consider Pension and Wage Increase
| In a man-to-man talk with a group of radio and television executives who visited Casa he did not directly refer to the "strong" letters he recently wrote to the "strong" letters he wrote to a group of radio and television executives who visited Casa he did not directly refer to the "strong" letters he recently wrote to the "strong" letters he wrote to a group of radio and television executives who visited Casa.
The "strong" letters that he recently wrote to the "executives of radio and television visited Casa he did not refer directly to the "strong" letters that he recently wrote to the "executives of radio and television visited Casa. Virgilio Brunet, president of the Teachers Association, informed EL MUNDO yesterday that the Board of Directors will discuss the matter during a meeting called for tomorrow. He added that Miss Corma Mowrey, president of the Aiocla(Continued on page 16, Col. 4)
By REX CHANEY WASHINGTON, Dec. 15.(PU)-The House Appropriations Committee today approved new military appropriations amounting to 516,SiS,000.00) and defense officials said they will request additional millions to put more than three million men at arms by mid-June.
weapons by mid-June. The new spending bill was immediately referred to the House floor with bipartisan support and with the warning of Representative George H. Mahon, Democrat of Texas, that "war on a large scale may break out at any time. Mahon, chairman of the Subcommittee on Military Appropriations, said there is still hope for peace, but it is held "by an extremely slender thread, and with each passing day the danger grows. Mahon admitted that the acceleration of loi poapa'ratlvos militare" may prompt Russia to undertake large-scale Contra, the free world, but said qu" those fears should not stop the rearmament drive because "no security is possible as long as we are weak"'. The measure will increase military spending for the fiscal year ending June 30 to $342,000,000,000,000, but senior Pentagon officials said they will need between $82,000,000,000,000 and $85,000,000,000,000 for the Korean war and to deal with the threat of communist aggression throughout the rest of the world.
A, Chief Arroyo Confirms There Was State Alert [Puerto Rico Newspaper Falsely Quoted Him, Expresses. Passes Canceled By ENRIQTERAMIREZ BRAU Reda-Mor of EL MUNDO E! Diario de Puerto Rico, in its df edition today alleges that jfl Police Adjutant. Guillermo Arroyo described as "unfounded" the information published by EL MUNDO regarding the alert status of the Folíela. El Diario de Puerto Rico quoted the Police Auxiliary Chief, according to what he said in response to questions we asked him yesterday about the Diario's information. He said he did not say what was attributed to him. E! Adjutant then added 1 (Continued on page 13, Col. 1).
* fe ■ * jjRRl R Wnk í&¿ H Mr w (Il liwlll jRBy u ■ ®'"Ww. i j, 7"^Wi|RnRn r .-1 v* ' kBbmí IMMMfi ti ; . '®BT w "U ' I 1 H/ 1 - k' J II Bmh ■ I I f & RgESHBHBMMHMMHRMHMHMHHnMRi
he TXm TXm araaMMua e""4a A we A Al */mi Ja Aa/W W W O i v ¥1" u" ¡ve w w w UrBniBelvVW U" r Fv IJr'im nRíMniMWRAte baIIamm v IftvMaAélM mi la t - On the left, Gregorio RaraAaóaa, aaeloneUcta survived the M tiroteo a la Fortaloaa, aa coartadlo a la pristen guarded Ar varios
poUotaa. At right the barber Vidal Santiago, survivor of the shooting at VUta Falmoraa, walks towards the prison guarded by the CateaAe gunmen. The photo was taken when "1 aeuaado was leaving the Municipal Hospital. (Fotegrañaa do ZL MUNDO, by Luto de OaaoaayeL
The Enemy Was Forced to Withdraw, Leaving Hundreds of Hundreds Wounded and the Battle Was Waged Like Savage, Fighting Groups Hand-to-Hand By RUTHEFOIDM. POATS TOKYO, liberated, dicítmlifg 15. - Lai troop" northjmariconoi,. fighting body to body and parapetadas behind tchquss, broke ay "r "l "l spinal o d "l first Chinese assault against V compressed beachhead ¡¡n the northeast of Korea. ' y The steel curtain of the American .Third DlvleionVítroc". dló one or do" mile" under e| fanatical nialto launched by 2,0d) tro- , pas of shock d" the chlnot eight mile" to the oe "te d" Hungnam But it "e did not break. Finally le" Chinese retreated from the n "vadJ battlefield, leaving ios < idáve- ' re" of half their earn? radas. The battle raged for 5 "Jo the ■ day. As they fell back not "American," they approached, but '10 fieged the viate of the vltal A" vfatt- i to d" Yongpo, where alguí t operating at full steam lo" tr.fiiporZ allied tea." The enemy ""t has to- - given via " eleven mile" northwest of the Hunj/iam port sector. ' 1 (Generé Douglas MacArthur's headquarters have soBeitOo quo m no longer mention ova madon - d t the head of Hungnam beach. Before "" that "" hlder" the request, the" deypseho" ¿"1 ité- । tor have indicated that the waeua* dón began the moons and o " was continuing). Loa battle-hardened* tolda je* do! commander generates! Bol wt R. Soule so ant aunoraonv lar.... Soule m scored a - íctorta táctíe" in 1" test projmbur - west of RanOiung. But it only gave the defenders of the twelve-milite beachheads time to prepare against new aoon "tidM. Tree Chinese divisions Mítban to f distancie to attack and between eight and nine advanced l ida the sector. 1 - Do" American platoons", as of clon shoulder", fell in ' 1 the middle of the Chinese assault. At least one was lost. But during the night diaparoita tra" 1 véa could be heard from the dark land of =nadíe, and it was believed that the Yankee" lost" I quote Trying to regrosar,i) Although the Chinese dented the 3 perimeter of the beachhead lo" officers of the Third Dvlálórí j quoted confiadoa in that loj raTán 1 reiiitlr as long as" it is neceaai o. MU Chino" Killed T Lo"< acidados, the gunners V- the pilots" of the fighters of the Marine Infantry and the Avladó" N"-' valdnformed that a thousand of theT-chi-nos, some of them riding on Mongolian ponies, were killed m the battle and that another" hundreds rmult wounded". '- /
As the Americans tightened their grip on the port city of Hungnam and its neighboring industrial center of Hamhung, with the nearby Yongpo Airport, they destroyed the railroad tracks and all other traffic arteries leading to the hololllo, r Throughout the cold, dark Korean night, the perimeter of the airport was momentarily filled with the "cold, dark Korean night. For a moment, the perimeter was blocked by the demolition cbi m. used by the dofeniore" in the deitruedon of the i®, given" the" facilities and equipment that could not be removed, quickly and quickly. The officers of the Torcers and vision never doubted that the soul in the battle was only tom" "". that the onslaught i" 2,000 troops chlns" was the prtm 'ro earga, to test the defer roo before the Chinese ai L. met with all the forces t ú" han. concentrated in the vicinity/ p* Italy do! ooeto of Hamht it broke out in all its fury as at eight o'clock dól morning dól vlorhoa. CZ ro the platoons of £ Man been exchanging was m eon the Chinese two of the din te the night dol Juevoa Lo, notated! do vanguard called to the blanket of the night. ** Chinese "committed was roe!" v'. Un" ■n?!-? 0 " 10 " - 'o l "no fe fO" quo the Maqué fu£! * First petoton fencedJtíSrtá ? Mdl ° ,u but T worried, - "* - Locha to Body Then it was called to* all* lea pe < tones do vanfuardia, and a SíA foooBtar a loe two 1 t totone* atora da-BeroMARÍ ¡ company fuá strongly atse. . (Continued on pf. u CoL | - ' . - - -- -