THE NANDO
WEATHER BRIEFS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Medium cloudy with a few scattered showers, II ge roo and alelados. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY! - High temperature. N degrees: minimum, 18 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4¡M o'clock Urde, tiM inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, July 28. (PU). - At 1* afternoon today the following* temperature* were reported: New York, M; Chicago, 84: Wáshíngton, Uj Miami, M. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: mostly sunny with diopster* showers in Is* early* evening. 1* high, near 96.
TOMORROW'S DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second claco "*-**-" Poet OmoA San Juan, P. B
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, JULY 29, 19S0
NUMBER 14094 CINCO CENTAVi
Reds Manage to Infiltrate Through Gap in Inchon Allies Aim to Stop Russian Strategy Baruch Modifies Plan for Economic Controls
The American Resistance Bobillo *** ' NORTH korsa < r ' A '>ro%"L SOUTH Ko "f* kuri "3nClT . 1 * írZ --""*<ooojrc7j* - TeHe" he _ * * ' ' / ' W nmmuR
The floeima *41 Id"" Mfialan "1 empaje de loe roJoa along the battle front (solid line) in South Korea, in accordance with the situation prevailing on TI dq July, shortly after the one month anniversary of the start of hostilities. The American and South Korean troop pockets are concentrated on the southeastern coast of South Korea. MacArthur headquarters reported that all along the line running eastward from Yongdong toward the coast, operations had stalled, while at the other end of the line 00 reported that American troops had captured Hacking. (Associated Press photo).
It Was Decided For More Benign Action ■■ I-I. II ■■■■■■ * Supports President's Request Would Give Body Authority To Regulate Wages And Wages By WARREN DUFFER WASHINGTON, July 28. (PU1Bernard M. Baruch today abruptly modified his proposals for a general mobilization at a time when they were gaining powerful support in the House and Senate. WASHINGTON. July 28. - U.)-President Truman today held a conference d"" forty-five mlnutoa non au Cabinet, pern loa aides to the President said later that the conference had been devoted to domestic problems. Vice President Alben W. Berkeley said it was a "routine" session on domestic economic phases. Including controls, but that there was "nothing specific." Defense Secretary Louis Johnson said that "we talked about a little bit of everything." Baruch telephoned Burnet R. Maybank, a South Carolina Democrat and chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, asking him to approve the drastic program of controls on credit and industrial materials submitted by President Truman. (Continued on page 15, Col. 4) Optimism Of Final Victory Exists WASHINGTON, July 28. (PUT - A senior Army representative, acting on information received from General Douglas MacArthur, said U.S. troops "will not be thrown off the Korean peninsula." The representative "expressed optimism and said he was encouraged by the news received from the supreme commander of the United Nations forces. He stated that "there is no reason to despair of the situation. We are not going to be thrown out of the Peninsula". Asked why the military elements in Washington are so optimistic about the military situation in the face of the news of rapid and extensive advances of the North Koreans on the front, the spokesman replied that the optimism in the capital is "a reflection" of the optimism of the ' (Continued on page 15, Col. 3)
Ix>a 153-millimeter cations of the First Artillery Division were lined up* in a fighting position in a ravine just outside of San Juan.
One San Juan Grocer Said to Have Butter 4 Despite Vicéns Ríos Claim, Others Deny Having Product By R. Gálves Maturana Editor of EL MUNDO Only one of the seven main grocers in the metropolitan area reported yesterday that he had butter in his possession, although it was not for sale, while awaiting the new prices to be announced by the General Supply Administration. Mr. José R. Fuentes, of the firm F. y J. M. Carrera, informed EL MUNDO, during a survey yesterday, that the firm had the product in stock but that it could not be put on sale until the General Supply Manager issues the new administrative order increasing the price. They say that they do not have the product in stock, but six of the main wholesalers, located in the metropolitan area, reported that they do not have the product. The firms B. Fernández Hermanos, Sobrinos de Izquierdo, Malgor y Compañía, Martínez y Hermano said that they do not have the product in stock. Mr. Antonio Quintana, gives the firm B. Quintana and Co., peanuts, stated that the (Continued on page 16, Col. 8)
The meeting followed a meeting of the Moscow Committee of the International Organization. The meeting followed an official session of the Council this morning, from which Russia was absent. On that occasion it was resolved to hold another meeting next June, to give the Western majority another opportunity to close any avenue of escape that might be open to "their battle plan" on the Korean question. The officials of the nations and delegations, meanwhile, are still wondering what was the motive that moved Russia to suddenly announce in recent days the termination of its 29-week boycott. Five Russian moves" The" conjecture revolves around five possible" Russian moves, ranging from a move to" restore peace in Korea to obliterating the UN measures taken in the Korean "wasteland" in some new communist aggression. The five possible Russian moves are: 1) Propose a medloclone in the Korean conflict, according to Russia's terms. 2) To initiate a propaganda campaign denouncing U.S. "Intervention" in Korea, and undermining as much as possible U.N. efforts to expel the Invaders from South Korea. (Continued on page 16, Col. 7)
Yongdnng, shortly before the city fell into the hands of the red North Koreans. Sandbags" protect the front of the" cannon front, (Photo Fren"" Associates),
Attempt to thwart attempt to sabotage UN effort in Korea will be thwarted
Officials Still Intrigued by Soviet Decision to End 29-Week Boycott By BRUCE MUNN LAKE SUCCESS, July 28 (PU)--The non-Communist majority of the United Nations Security Council held a special meeting late in the afternoon to outline strategy to prevent any attempt to sabotage the United Nations war effort in Korea, when the Soviet delegate to the meeting, who was elected to the Security Council, said he would try to prevent any attempt to sabotage the United Nations war effort in Korea.
E. U.S. To Acquire Puerto Rican Surplus Believed To Total 135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons.135,000 Tons. Discussions" have begun on the possible purchase of 150,000 tons of surplus sugar from Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. The Department of Agriculture officials told the United Press that they are negotiating the purchase of Hawaii's surplus, estimated at 100,000 tons. It is believed that Puerto Rico has a surplus of 135,000 tons over the 1,235,000 tons it is authorized to sell on the mainland, on the island, and to the Economic Cooperation Administration. Hawaii is reported to have one hundred thousand ton" or mi" "over its quota on the mainland market of 1,052, 000 tons. The supplemental purchase, but not ending it the Government's mobilization against the threat of a sugar shortage and rising prices for the commodity. The "artificial" has been called "artificial" to 1a erial" sugar, arising from 1"" purchases motivated by fear. Falt" Decision The Government yesterday took the first step toward 1* solution of the, problem. Agriculture Secretary Charles Brannan then announced that the U.S. had offered to buy all the remaining Cuban sugar - estimated at 610,000 tons. (Continued on page 15, Col. 3)
Supply Law to be Amended to Avoid Speculation
Muñoz Will Also Include Patent Bill In Convocation. There will be another Extraordinary Session By JOAN MARTINEZ CHAFEL Editor of EL MUNDO Governor N¿> was in Fortaleza yesterday. He intends to spend this weekend touring the Island, and will probably visit some municipalities, without prior notice. The first week of the extraordinary session of the Legislative Assembly has passed without
Legislative Assembly without any project being considered; but in the second week all the work will be done, which will not be limited to only two subjects as it was thought at the beginning. The convocation will be extended according to news we have received. There will be many new matters to be submitted by the Governor, among them the following: Amendments to the Supply Law to try to prevent agiotism and undue speculation in articles of prime necessity. The Treasurer will submit a bill amending the excise law related to the patents to be paid by small establishments that sell alcoholic beverages. Patent Law In the last Legislature, a law was passed increasing the price of these patents; but the increase was disproportionately high for the small establishments, and it is now intended to correct this mistake, making the increase proportional to all establishments that sell alcoholic beverages. The Department of Labor will submit a bill amending the Driver's Insurance Law 11 with the sole purpose of facilitating its processing (Continued on page 18, Col. 7).
4 La Telefónica Prepares Long Range Plan Provisional Rates Begin July 1* Puerto Rico Telephone Company is working on the preparation of a long range plan to introduce a series of improvements and extensions in telephone service. Questioned yesterday by Mr. José D. Domínguez, general manager of Telefónica, as to what extensions and improvements the company proposed to make, he said that it is working on the preparation of the long-range plan stipulated by the Public Service Commission in its resolution authorizing Telefónica to increase all rates by twelve percent. Mr. Domingues did not stir on i (Continued on page 18 Col. 7)
Decisive Day Believe U.S. Command Will Know Today If It Can Stay in Korea
By HABRY FERGUSON Chief of United Prona* Foreign Services NEW YORK, July 38 - Friday and Saturday are the days of decision in Korea. The greatest battle of the war is being fought. It may go on for twenty-four hours or more, and when it is over, the American commanders will know whether they can remain in Korea or whether they should comment on preparations for a U.S.-style evacuation of the port of Pusan. * "The enemy is looking for a decision," - said a spokesman for MacArthur headquarters. - "He will do anything in these momeotoa to break the line*" All* the dispatches from the frontier Indicate that the North American position criticizes you. What the American coman-
The U.S. officials in Coros are trying to prevent their position from changing from critical to desperate. We currently have a beachhead, which consists, roughly speaking, of one-fifth of the territory of the Cordovan peninsula. Our troops are outnumbered four to one. The Reds began their offensive in the midst of heavy rains, which indicates that the United Nades are deprived of the weapons in which they have absolute superiority - airplanes. The Communists have attacked about forty-five thousand men, and have managed to break through the American left flank (Continued on page 16 Col I) - *.
Army Call-up Quota Raised
726 Enrollees To Be Selected From 7,000 Candidates, Beginning Tuesday For BUBICO E. RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The Selective Service State Headquarters in Puerto Rico announced yesterday that the number of men corresponding to the Puerto Rico quota, to be called up by the Army, now totals seven hundred and twenty-six. José E. Colom, new director of the Selective Service in Puerto Rico, who added that for the selection of these 728 men, a total of 7,00Q registered men from the different Local Boards of the Island will be called to the Camp. Originally, 800 men were called to choose 100, which corresponded to the quota for the first call made by the Army to the Department of Defense, which consisted of 30,000 men. The Army announced yesterday to the Department of Defense that it would call up a total of 100,000 men for the months of September and October. Puerto Rico is to send 736 shoulders. The Selective Service State Headquarters reported that the first conscripts will leave for Camp Buchanan next Tuesday, August 1. The quota for September has been increased from 100 to 242 men. The quota for the month of October will be of the same nature, that is, 242 men each month. In total 728 men. As reported yesterday by this newspaper, the figure of 100,000 men requested by the Army includes twenty thousand Enrollees who were called up by the Army's first call on July 10. They will be in camp by September. This means that only eighty thousand additional men will be drafted. The local Selective Service office has transmitted orders to all its Local Boards to proceed to send 7,000 Enlistees together to the Recruiting Center to select the 726 required for induction into the armed forces by September 30 next. The process of sending men to the Recruiting Center, for physical and intelligence examinations, will begin on Tuesday, August 1, at the rate of 100 men, until August 21, and 150 shoulders daily from that date onwards, until completing the 7,000 Enrollees called, from which the 726 shoulders that will enter as active soldiers in the Armed Forces will be selected.
Mayor Alvares Declared Yesterday Regarding First Charges
There are Lists of Municipal Employees Allegedly Taken to Hearings For M. NIEVES RIVERA -- Editor of EL MUNDO Yesterday a list, even more numerous than that of July 19, of employees of the Municipality of Rio Piedras who were allegedly taken in different vehicles to the caucus room of the Insular Capitol, where the hearing against Mayor Augusto Alvarez is being held, was submitted to the Auditor of Puerto Rico. The Insular Audit Inspectors prepared a list that included employees of the different municipal dependencies, among them a strong core of Public Works employees led by Francisco Vázquez. The place destined to the public in the room where the hearing is being held was virtually full yesterday morning, when Mayor Alvares took the witness chair to testify in the case against him before the Permanent Legislative Commission. Since the beginning of the Commission's sessions, Mayor Alvares' supporters have preferentially occupied the seats on the right side of the room; however, yesterday morning, they occupied most of the seats on both sides. Doc'waclón do Alvares Alvaros occupied the tostlgos chair throughout the morning. alen- ।
■Wi jy / Wá I - B I The Mayor of Río Piedras, Mr. Augusto P. Alvares, while testifying yesterday morning in his own defense before the Legislative Standing Committee hearing the charges brought against him by *1 governor, aeZor Lola MuAos Marín. (Photograph by EL MUNDO)
Expressed Several Times His Absolute Confidence in the Honesty of the Auditor d> ampllamen'o Questioned by the spokesman for the defense, Guillermo Pierluissl. In relation to charge number 1, on the double payment of the amount of 8800.88 to Francisco Bechara, for materials served to the Municipality, Alvarez d'3 that his only Intervention in the matter .consisted in exercising his ministerial function, which is to sign the papers audited by the corresponding official, in this case the Municipal Auditor. He says that he learned of the alleged Irre1 ..larldad after the investigation of the case; he stated that Francisco Bechara never spoke to request the payment of the amount owed to him. To another question from the defense counsel, Alvarez said that he signed 408 payment vouchers of the aforementioned account for 8800.88 "because I have absolute confidence in the honesty of the Municipal Auditor", and insisted that he acted in the exercise of his ministerial function. As for the second charge on the alleged false information given by Alvarez to the person in charge of the Social Programs Division of the Land Authority, to obtain a plot of land for the use of Maria Luisa Encarnacion, the witness said he did not go with her to the offices (Continued on page 16, Col. 3).
Kumchón To Taejón Road Attacked
Also Assaulted Zone 1® U.S. Troop Division* Resists The Mass A I a q u e s s i n M a s s e . - Bad Weather Continues For Earnest HOBERECHT ' TOKYO, July 29 (PU). - The American forces continue to struggle desperately to hold their lines in the face of the Communists' general effort to smash their positions and seize the whole of Southern "Core" before American reinforcements can arrive. In fighting nine Communist divisions and outnumbered four to one, the Americans were forced to fall back 20 miles in the Chlngju sector, getting within 90 miles of the important port of Pusan, through which they receive their supplies from Japan. The aerial reconnaissance" proved that the red" group their forces, threatening the right flank of the northwest line Northamerlcans, On the other hand the pressure on the front defended by the American First Division of Csballerla, Indicates that probably the comunlstai will launch within a few hours another assault in mass. The Korean Communists opened a gap between the American Vlgéslmoqulnt* Division and the South Korean forces on their right,' Decisive Battle Departing from the terse form of expression, General Douglaa MacArthur in his midnight war communiqué, said that aa was fighting "slvajemenet". MacArthur reported that the Communist forces were throwing everything they had into the decisive battle and that they continued to press hard along the entire front, "but in general our lines were holding". Jack James, United Press correspondent with the South Koreans, reported from the front that a new danger had arisen for the American advance in Southeast Korea, over which a strong detachment of Communist guerrillas was advancing from the port of Pohang, threatening to cut the Kumchon-Taegu-Pu-san railroad. The main communist reinforcement is concentrated on the Taejon-Ktunchon axis. But the Reds are paying a high price for every foot of ground they occupy. The" news received from the front says that yesterday 1* artillery of the Twenty-fifth Division (of colored soldiers) caused the Communists 1,600 to 2,000 casualties, between killed and wounded. The atmospheric conditions have made air operations difficult, but on the coast the big guns of the fleet have cooperated with the Americans. In any case, the B-26 and B-29 bombers, taking advantage of the clear moments, dropped 300 tons of demolition bombs on the communications centers supplying the communist forces on the front. In the war communiqué it is reported that priority has been given to ammunition, supplies and fuel for jet fighters. This means that transport planes, such as those which broke the Berlin blockade by the Russians from the air, are (continued on 1* page 15, Col. 3).
Change expected at AGS Félix C. Mej'ías to take over Agency's Direction
By Luis Hernández Aquino Editor of EL MUNDO Reports obtained by EL MUNDO, from reliable sources, indicate that the Deputy Commissioner of Commerce, Mr. Felix C. Mejias, will take charge of the General Administration of Supplies, an agency that will be transferred to the Department of Agriculture and Commerce as a result of the government reorganization. The resignation of the present administrator of said governmental entity, Mr. Antonio Vicéns Ríos, is expected, so that when the Legislature meets again, which will take place soon, to implement the governmental reorganization, the way will be clear for the new Incumbent and Mr. Vicéns Ríos will not be a subordinate of his.
The situation of the increase and shortage of essential foodstuffs that has been operating in the Island lately, and for which the AGS has not implemented an effective plan, in which the interests of the consumer public are not affected, has created in the high spheres of the Government displeasure on one side and the desire to achieve a change that is of effective utility, with the reorganization. In accordance with plan number 13, for the reorganization of the Insular Government, which will now be submitted by the Governor to the Legislature, which is expected to meet on Monday, August 7, the General Supply Administration will be abolished as an independent agency and its functions and those of its Administrator will be transferred to the Department of Agriculture.