THE NfUNDO
f WEATHER FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Considerable cloudiness with occasional showers during the day, becoming partly cloudy with scattered showers in the evening. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: - High, 78 degrees; low, 69 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 29.98 inches of mercury,
NEW YORK, April 7. (PU). -' On 1* afternoon today the following temperatures were recorded: New York, 43; Chicago, 82; Wáshlngton, 48; Miami. 88. Predictions: Fair weather, with temperatures slowly rising; highest temperature, sntre M degrees.
TOMORROW DAILY
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
ANNUAL XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. R.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, APRIL 8, 1950
NUMBER 13983 FIVE CENTAVOS
House Approved Bill on Use of Spanish
Senate Passes $1,035,000 For PEG Approved $235,000 For Scholarship Program - Sigue Trabajando Hoy In its Thursday session, the Senate approved an appropriation of $1,035,000 for administrative expenses rie! Emergency rie Guerra Program and for the Emergency rie Guerra Program, Before rie recessing until ten rie o'clock this morning, "Abado, the Senate approved the following bills providing appropriations: P. rie la C, 552, to appropriate to the Office rie Personnel the amount rie two hundred thirty-five thousand dollars to continue the rie scholarship program authorized by Lev 136 rie 1949. P. rie C, 536, to appropriate to the Department rie Instruction the amount rie $9,916.50 ron riestlnn to payment rie outstanding accounts.rie prior fiscal years nor 194950, P. rie C. 330, to authorize the Administrator of the State Insurance Fund to make available to the Commissioner of Labor of Puerto Rico a sum not to exceed $45,000, from the funds collected for premiums, in accordance with the Workers' Compensation Act, for the purpose of partially defraying the salaries and other expenses of the Health and Industrial Safety Division of the Department of Labor. P. S. 2R4. appropriating the sum of $6,000 for the Commissioner of the Interior to move the architectural altarpiece and bronze statue erected by Don Eduardo Georgettl to the memory of Won Luis Muñoz Rivera, in San Turre, to a prominent location in Muñoz Rivera Park, to be designated by the Parks Commission. P. del S. 111, to authorize and order the Auditor and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to pay Mr. Frank Coll Cuchi the sum of $600 for salaries earned as professor in the Department of Pedagogy of the School of Industrial Arts of the University. - Continued on page 18, Col. 8)
Puerto Rican Mother of 1950 Elected
It Would Be Mandatory In Island Schools Authorizes Interior Dept. Interior Dept. To Practice Motor Vehicle Exams By Luis Sánchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer The House of Representatives approved on third reading, in its session last Thursday, a bill by Rep. Marta Libertad Gómez that provides for the mandatory use of the Spanish language as a teaching vehicle in public schools. At present, Spanish language instruction is being carried out in the schools of the country as a rule dictated by the Department of Instruction, and the purpose of the approved bill is to give legal weight to said rule and thus prevent any future Commissioner of Instruction from changing the procedure. Among other things, the bill establishes that "as of the 1950-51 school year, teaching in public schools shall be carried out through the use of the Spanish language, exempted in the teaching of English". The ■ House also approved the bill that amends the Automobile and Transit Law to provide for 1" inspection, by the Internal Affairs Committee, of any motor vehicle "for greater safety on the roads". The Lower House also agreed to "authorize the Administration of Social Programs of the Puerto Rico Lands Authority to dispose of the sum of $30,000 from the Title V and VI Special Fund to be used in the development of the housing construction program for rural communities. Another approved bill authorizes the TA's Social Program Administration to use the sum of $75,000 for the development of the "Small Community Industries Development Program in the Rural Zone of Puerto Rico". Other bills approved were the "lgplente8: P. rie la C, 999, To authorize the lottery or lottery called "Blngo" in Puerto Rico in churches and lodges of a non-pecuniary nature. P. S. 216, to authorize the municipalities of Puerto Rico to provide for "study" in the centers of higher education in Puerto Rico and in the United States of America. P. 9R7. to authorize the Municipal Assembly of Las Marías to include in its Regular Budget for fiscal year 195051 and subsequent years, the sum of four hundred fifty-two ($4,252) dollars and sixty-two cents (62> cents), to pay "debt" incurred by said municipality for services and supply of materials. P. rie C. 949, authorizing the Asamhle . Municipal Assembly of Toa Alta to include in its regular budget for 1951-52 or in the budget for future years, appropriations to pay Sosa Drug ('o, the amount of $2,622.60. to Méndez Laboratories of America, Inc. $366.50, to Pyrmont J.aboratorie" Work Jnc. $800, to Far(Contlnúa en Ja page 18, Col. 3)
IK .■ ■ \ * BBBBBB Doña Boa* Búas Vda. de Hllvs, selected the 1980 Puerto Rican Mother of the Year. She will be the candidate of Puerto Rico for the contest in which the "('leerlonurá the Model Mother of America, Designation of Committee Recavó In Doña Rosa Báez Vda. Silva Doña Luisa Chacón Viuda de Sería Sucesora.- Mencionan Oirás Damas Boricuas The distinguished lady ponceña Doña Rosa Báez widow of Silva, is the Puerto Rican Madt'e that will represent Puerto Rico in the national activity in which the American Mother rie 1950 is to be chosen. A committee chaired by Mr. -- A - - - .... ,-
Mariano Villaronga, Commissioner of Instruction, carefully considered the numerous candldntas submitted by the school districts, and finally chose Mrs. BAez widow rie Silva, in attention to her valuable services in civic and social movements. The committee wishes to emphasize," said the official note, "the fact that all the candidates presented meet equally well the qualities and virtues of an exemplary mother, but that Mrs. Baez widow rie Silva is the best. The interest in the civic task is an essential and decisive requirement, both in the local and national elections, in accordance with the rules established for the election of the American Mother every year". (Continued on page 18. Col. 1).
Boricua Expedition Encountered Hostile Group However No Difficulty Arose. Barner Will Broadcast El Mundo Mr. Pedro .T. Plzé. radio amateur who owns a 1,000 watt amateur station located in Ponte, has furnished to the editorial staff of EL MUNDO in that city a daily communication ton the Puerto Rican expedition to the Upper ( Orinoco, which is led by Mr. Venj tura Rnrnás, Jr. (Continued on page 16. Col, 4>
1 - ■ ... Boricua Miss Calls for Brother After Getting Lost While Traveling Across U.S.
LONG REACH, California, April 7 (PU)- Miss Otilia Valle Garcia finally found her brother after getting lost in the last few miles of her 3,000-mile journey from her home in Puerto Rico. Her brother Jorge, a corporal stationed at March Air Force Base near Riverside, California, sent her the ticket to come live with him. Miss Valle, thirty years old, flew to New York, then took a transcontinental bus to join her brother, who was stationed at March Air Force Base near Riverside, California.
to meet her brother in front of the Riverside Supermarket. She did not find the RI. verslde Supermarket, but flew to a market of the same name here, and left the bus, waiting for her brother on a bench in front of the store. The Police, by means of an Interpreter .found out what happened to him, offering him the hnspiinlidnri of the local jail. (Continued on page IR, Col. 4>
Giant Spacecraft Crashes in Hawaii During Test Flight
11 II HHM ■SMB [ H a mi I w/vX' ; Ü f .- MLJ - . HBkmí w Bhx |l - " rfrr-r* B* > B1m s- 18 J& a w HL "'Br 'b ,-j . J x^ 5 *<<Am e jMridl ■B .JO'áO- ■ I R- Bk BV V :o /V I J F I sKUh . -XwT - ■ B F F v ' BPF / - - ■ ". .1 W ' w '' ■ H -^■ x '' Fs*
This dramatic photograph was taken at the time of the Marshall Mars plane crash near Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on April 5. The photo was captured by Navy photographer Jos Martin. Jos Martin, who had been assigned to cover underwater maneuvers at the base from an Irm helicopter, flew to the plane as it tried to land with an engine on fire, and managed to capture the moment of the explosion.
the moment of the explosion, with all its drama. On the right, we see the survivors of the disaster. From left to right: James M. Tingler, of Youngstown, Ohio; Leslie Taylor, of Kalb, an electronics operator; Luis Rolando, of Newport, R.I.; and Vengleiro Vengleiro, of Newport, Rhode Island. Rhode Island; and Vengle Hughes, of Los Angeles, California. According to a dispatch from the United Press, to the skill and llgeresa
dll pilot in making the crash landing at sea, before the plane exploded and sank, must be credited with saving the lives of his crew members. The pilot, Lt. Cmdr. Glenn E. Simmons, of Dallas. Texas, steered the giant craft with great skill after the third engine caught fire while* making a test flight. Shortly before the plane
headed out to sea on the rocky coast of Oahu, Simmons ordered his crew to stand by and board the lifeboats. The crew was rescued by two helicopters, a patrol craft and a submarine, which were guided to the scene of the disaster by a column of smoke rising two thousand feet. (Associated Press photos).
Lavatory Ceremony Held at Cathedral
|é X | K . ®>ftiif ' ln. "'tSiBA' 1 ' ' f /HimMK "B T ■ IBfI 9i9t <L Jr -?®S® Vr<: > * i H / ' * M H Sil F'y' 4 7 B bL be< w XA JBIBt W : Ji % - ■k J& ¡LA BK7 buAS ?BWf\ b trf X Jk Mr ? wHiBIBfc.Bi B -wil ' 1 "F . XJ BKwE^^^^B k i AJ MBB BBBBBK.- x - A
In In Urde of Thursday ne celebrated In traditional ceremony of the Lavatory, in In cathedral of Han John. As in previous years, twelve seniors from the Tarada 3 nursing home in Tuerta de Tierra represented the Twelve Apostles. The photograph captures the
The photograph captures the moment when the Bishop of San Luis, Monsignor Pedro Jaime Davis, assisted by another priest, proceeded to wash the feet of the elderly, commemorating the moment when Jesus washed the feet of his apostles. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
Census Data Will Not Be Used by the Income Tax Bureau Mejias Clarifies Procedure and Use of Information The information being collected by the Census on household income will not harm anyone since it will not be used by the Puerto Rico Income Tax Bureau because it is unrelated. This was stated yesterday by Mr. Felix Mcjlns, supervisor of the Census Bureau for Puerto Rico, who once again urged the Puerto Rican public to offer all truthful information on income that may be requested by the enumerators conducting the seventeenth decennial census of 1950. In regard to this situation, Mr. Mejhis made the following statements to the Press: "We have had knowledge of some cases in which the persons enumerated show reserve or, let us say, shyness, in answering the questions on Income that are regularly asked by our enumerators. "The Census wants to clarify the procedure that is established when a person is enumerated and the use given to the information they provide. It also points out the scope of the law regarding confidentiality and how to deal with the information that is collected. "The enumerator is under the obligation to obtain the information required by the Census questionnaires without omitting any question that is applicable to the case being enumerated. The. The Census Law mandates that the enumerator (Continued on page 18, Col. 7).
Ramirez Pabon Had Incident With Attorney Andrea Ribas Occur While Witness Testifying in Connection With Crespo Pudin's Case. Hearing Continued Monday
By JOSE M. GARCIA CAI,DERON EL MUNDO Staff Writer
The legal battle waged by Perico Crespo Pudin, in his effort to annul the verdict rendered by a San Juan District Court Jury, which found him guilty of the crime of first degree murder, was violently interrupted the day before yesterday, when a disagreement arose between Judge Rodolfo Ramirez Pabon --- --- and the lawyer Cesar Cesar Cesar Pabon, a lawyer of the San Juan District Court, and a judge of the San Juan District Court.
The incident, which raised fears of a physical encounter between the judge and the lawyer, occurred while Gonzalo Areverio Fernandez was testifying, employee of the National City Bank who claims to have seen some of the jurors who intervened in the Crespo Pariln trial talking to some of the lawyers while they were having lunch at a restaurant in Rah WT After testifying to questions from Andréu Ribas, he saw the jurors talking to José Sánchez and lii. lio Torrea Marti the prosecutor Angel Viera Martinez, asked riel witness qtie rlljern what were the Jurors to which he alluded. When Acevedo Fernandez answered that he did not know them by name, but that he could point them out, the prosecutor pointed to a citizen who was observing the hearing of the motion for a new trial and asked if that person had acted as a juror in the trial against El Raton. Attorney Andréu Ribas requested the court to order that the name of the person the prosecutor pointed out be recorded in the record. The judge, declared the attorney's request without a motion, but when the witness said that the person indicated by the prosecutor did not speak as part of the jury, Andréu Ribas reiterated his motion to have the name of the citizen in question put on record 7 (Continued on Page IR, Col. 2)
There Were Arrests For Drunkenness Good Friday " Police Opinion Number Exceeded Other Years,- 8 Soldiers Arrested Tor ENRIQUE RAMIREZ BRAU Editor of EL MUNDO The Police had to dedicate themselves until 4 A. M. yesterday, to the arrest of numerous people who were passing through the streets of San Juan in a state of drunkenness, after the religious services of Holy Thursday in the churches were over. Lieutenant Victor Quiñones is of the opinion that the number of persons arrested for drunkenness exceeded other years for this same date. There were drunkenness of all kinds; marches of soldiers through the streets of San Juan, who disturbed public order with unusual shouts; races of citizens in a state of drunkenness, who fled from the agents to avoid being taken to the barracks in the prisoner bus, and hit the pavement. The San Francisco Street Police charged Gualdo Ayala, 34, Carlos Plaza Fl(Contlnún on page 16, Col. 2) with violations of ordinance 384.
Leaders Discuss Ponce Case
They Seek Solution To Their Problems Villaronga Announces More Schools. Another Hospital Will Be Started in August In the offices of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mr. Ernesto Ramos Antonin!, a meeting was held between legislators and government officials and municipal leaders of the Ponce municipality, with a view to finding a solution to the innumerable problems confronting the community. The meeting was attended by legislators Francisco L. Anselm), Agustin Burgos, Leoncio Santaella León, Mario Canales, government officials Sergio Cuevas Bustamante, rie Aqueduct and Sewerage; Mariano Vlllaronga, Department rie Eriucaclón; Julio Enrique Mpnagas, Commissioner of Recreation and Sports; Carlos Passalacqua, Junta rie Píaniflcaelón; Jesús Benitez. Castaño, Department of the Interior; Rafael Ramirez, Water Resources Authority; Dr. Juan A. Pons, Commissioner of Health; Plácido Acevedo, Division of the Bureau of the Budget. Also participating in the meeting was Mr. Andrés "rillasca, Mayor of Ponce, who raised numerous problems that are currently affecting the community, among the issues discussed was the construction of three high schools. The Commissioner of Instruction stated in said meeting that Ponce will eventually have three high schools. The funds for the construction of these high schools will be among the $18,000,000 of the loan recently made by the Government. The problem of the Charlea H. Terry Atlantic Park, on whose land a school is located, was discussed at length. According to Mr. Julio Enrique Monagas, the situation "is serious and has terrible moral consequences". He said that unedifying spectacles take place there and it is also feared that a slum may develop there, which is already beginning to stretch its tentacles. According to the Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, Ponce has perhaps the best prison in the country. The Attorney General stated that the main problem is the (continued on page 16, (.'ol. 5)