EL NANDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: Patchy to occasionally cloudy, with some scattered showers mostly in the morning. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High 80 degrees; low 70 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 88.97 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, May U. (PU). - In the afternoon today s" reported the* *1gulent* temperature*: New York, "7; Chicago, 78; Wáshlngton, 87; Miami, 84. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and doubtful* neighbors: mostly núblalo with little* change* in the* temperatures, with the mA* high temperature near M. Wind* variable* moderate*.
MARAÑA NEWSPAPER
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. B.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MAY 13, 1950
NUMBER 14017 FIVE CENTAVOS '
Carried a Container of Cañita Rum in a Suitcase
Rafael Rosado, seen on the left walking with a suitcase as if on a trip, was surprised by the Police, who discovered that what he was carrying in it was a container with five cents in it.
Rabies Case Confirmed In Pueblo Toa Alta It's About Dog That Bit Thirteen Year Old Girl Last April. Victim is in good health By C EL MUNDO Staff Writer The Health Department's laboratory and the Alabama Rabies Research Center yesterday concurred on the confirmation of a rabies case that arose in Pueblo Toa Alta.
of a case of rabies that arose in Toa Alta on April 8. According to Dr. Abel de Juan, director of the Department of Health's Bureau of Epidemiology, the Alabama Rabies Research Center sent a report yesterday to the Department of Health confirming as positive for rabies the case of a dog that bit a 13 year old girl in Toa Alta on April 8. The victim of the rabid dog is in perfect health after having received for 14 days the treatment of anti-rabies injections, which began to be administered immediately after being bitten. On the other hand, added Dr. de Juan, six dogs from Toa Alta that were bitten or had other contacts with the rabid dog remain in isolation at the Government of the Capital's dog depository. Last night, precisely, one of the isolated dogs died and the health authorities are studying the causes of his death. It is probable, according to Dr. De Juan, that the remaining dogs will be eliminated. -> According to our informant, the confirmation of the case of rabies was made by direct observations of cohollos and white mice which were inoculated with an emulsion prepared with pieces of the rabid dog's encephalon. Preventive measures Regarding the work of collecting dogs, Dr. Juan said that the people are learning to observe the necessary preventive measures to avoid the spread of rabies. In Rio Piedras, where there was no dog registry, one was opened the day before yesterday and dog owners are flocking to it in large numbers. Yesterday, explained our informant, the line of people who had their turn in front of the registry extended for a whole block. The registered dogs are vaccinated by a veterinarian at no cost to their owners. The director of the Epidemiology Department added that the collection of dogs, intensified with the acquisition of seven additional rolling cages, has resulted in a notable increase, from day to day, in the number of stray animals captured. Up to the present, he reported, the daily collection passes 300 dogs.
ft * I - No Telefónica Ruling Yet Likely to Discuss Rate Consideration Before the End of May The Public Service Commission has not entered into consideration of the Telefónica case, which it will probably do before the end of the current month, once it has finished studying the memorandum submitted by the Company to the Commission. When questioned to this effect, Mr. Jorge V. Toledo, President of the Board of Directors of the Company, stated that he would probably do so before the end of this month. Toledo, Chairman of the PSC, stated that "the Commission could not stipulate any fixed period, much less express that the telephone service rates will be increased, since the PSC has not entered into the consideration of the Telephone Company's case. Toledo said that the members of the Commission individually are studying the legal issues raised by the Company in the memorandum submitted at the request of this body. Said memo was requested at the conclusion of the hearings, to consider the interim rate setting bid by the Telephone Company on the basis of a 17 percent uniform rate increase. The attorneys for the Telephone Company have cited case law, established in the United States in cases similar to that of the Telephone Company in Puerto Rico, while alleging that despite the provisions of Act No. 12 of 1941, which authorizes the Company to fix the interim rate in Puerto Rico, the Telephone Company has not been able to obtain a uniform increase in the rate. 12 of 1941, which authorizes the Public Service Commission to fix interim rates that guarantee to public utilities a profit of not less than 5 percent over the original cost of the utility itself, less the depreciation suffered by the utility, the Commission is obligated to grant an allowance for working capital. This allegation is based on the Company's previously established contention that such a provision is absolutely necessary for the Company to operate properly. Telefónica's lawyers also cited the case of the sugar mills. . sugar mills case, which also touches on the point of provisional tariffs, somewhat related to the Telefónica case. The Company's case. On the other hand, Mr. To. (Continued on Page 18-Col. 8)
Conservatives Gain New * Advantages Over Labour.
LONDON, May 11 (Special to The New York Times) - In the elections held yesterday in all the cities and towns of England and Wales, the Conservatives made substantial gains over Labour and the Indo-Pendantlists. This was the first major electoral test in the country since the general election in February. The Conservatives gained control in some of the smaller towns*, became the majority party in many of the larger provincial cities, and consolidated their control in some of the larger provincial cities.
and consolidated their control in others. - As of one o'clock in the morning, with 340 of the 378 constituencies reporting final results, the Conservatives had a net gain of 193 seats. Party gains and losses at that time were as follows: Conservatives, gains 248: Losses, SS; Labor, gains 110; Losses 148; Liberals, Gains 15: Losses 31: Independent, gains 49; Losses 152. (Continued on Page 18-Col. 1)
gallons of cañita rum, as can be seen on the right. The smell of coffee and a few drops dripping from the suitcase gave the product away (Photographs from EL MUNDO).
When yesterday Rafael Rosado got off a bus in front of the railroad station with a suitcase in which he had a metal container with five gallons of cañita rum, it did not seem that luck was going to be in his favor. Rosado, as reported *in the Detective's room, was on his way to La Perla, and had gotten off in front of the railroad station. He walked calmly, "ln aoanechar that behind him traveled several detectives in a jeep, which was returning from the Court, Sergeant Diego Ortlz and other members of the Detective ge fixed very attentively in Rafa"! Pink, but more in the suitcase that he carried. The agents saw that a liquid was leaking from the suitcase, and arrested Rosado. The agents, according to Sergeant Ortlz, dipped their fingers in the liquid, and then put their fingers in their mouths, tasting it, It was cañita rum. It was cañita rum. 5 gallon container Rosado was taken to the Puerta de Tierra barracks, where once the suitcase was opened, the agents found inside a metal container containing five gallons of rum. The detainee alleged that he had left the El Tanguito neighborhood in Santurce to go to the La Perla neighborhood. It was in front of the railroad station that his bad star attracted the attention of Diego Ortlz and his men. The case was submitted yesterday to prosecutor Ernesto Mleres Callmano, who charged Rafael Rosado with violation of the Beverage Law and set bail at $1,000. The Island Police, as well as the agents of the Beverage and Narcotics Bureau of the Treasury Department, have been very active in the persecution of clandestine rum lately. This has resulted in the destruction of numerous stills on the island, the raid of homes where it is presumed that legal rum is sold, and the arrest of traffickers who are caught in the street. The case of Rafael Rosado, as reported, is unprecedented since he used an original method to try to smuggle a small amount of clandestine rum, which is to use a suitcase to hide the liquid.
Salvador Días Betancourt pleaded guilty yesterday before Judge Rodolfo Ramírez Pabón to the two crimes of theft with which he was charged. (Photo by EL MUNDO).
AGS Freezes and Rations Coffee Stocks.
Recommends 55c. No. 7 Industrial Committee No. 7 Industrial Committee No. 7, of the 1st Federal Division of Weeping and Salting, yesterday completed its work," and recommended a minimum wage of 55 cents an hour for the sugar processing industry. The agreement was reached by a vote of five to four. The new minimum wage for sugar mills is 15 cents more than the current minimum wage of 40 cents an hour. In this regard, the aforementioned agency issued the following note yesterday: 'This committee, presided over by Rector Jaime Benitez, of the University of Puerto Rico, was composed of representatives of the public sector, industry and labor, in equal parts. On the public side, in addition to Rector Benitez, were Dr. Pedro A. Cebollero, Dean of the College of Education of the University of Puerto Rico, and Mr. Morris Miller, an attorney from Washington. Representing labor were Mr. Prudencio Rivera Martínez, president emeritus of the Federación Libre de los Trabajadores de Puerto Rico, Mr. Tomás Méndez Mejia, president of the CGT (CIO), and Mr. Lewis J. Clark. CIO representative from Chicago, Illinois. Mr. Clark succeeded Mr. Lewis G. Hiñes of the American Federation of Labor of JVáshlngton on the committee. The employers' side was represented by Mr. J. B. ( García Méndez, executive vice-president of the Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association, Mr. J. A, F.. Rodriguez, president of the Puerto Rico Industrialists Association, and Mr. Rudolf F. Vogeler, of the Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce. Salarlos . "The committee recommended, in addition, the following rates for the following industries: "Metals, plastic products, machinery, instruments, transportation equipment and related industries: foundries, machinery and heavy metal products, 53 cents (current rate. 40 cents); light metal and plastic products. Including household appliances and consumer goods, 45 cents (salt it current, 35 and 40 cents): and Christmas trees, 40 cents", (salt it current. 40 cents). "Cement, 65 cents an hour, (salt it current 40 cents); Medía. 40 cents (current salary 23 and 33 cents). Artificial Flowers, 43 cents (current wage 13); v hairnets, 40 cents, (current salt it, 27 1!2 cents). "The present rates will remain in effect until approved by the Administrator of the Division of Hours and Wages following public hearings to be held in Washington on the recommendations of Industrial Committee No. 7, to receive evidence for or against the proposed rates. The dates of the public hearings will be announced in due course. The 75c Minimum. As will be recalled, the federal legislation providing for a minimum wage of 75 cents" for various industries and occupations was not applied in Puerto Rico because it was considered that this' was not adapted, in all cases, to the conditions of the pals. In this regard, 15" Iniulare" authorities took steps so that, instead, the practice of determining the wages based on the studies made by special committees "in each of the Industries in which the federal legislation would be applied would be continued in the Island. The minimum wage of 75 cents (Continued on page 18. Col. 8)
Sentenced on June 9 Salvador Díaz Betancourt Made Guilty Plea
Salvador Díaz Betancourt, a high school junior, pleaded guilty to the crime of assault before Judge Rodolfo Ramírez Pabón, of the San Juan District Court. The accused was charged with having assaulted, together with José Alberto Castañeda, Gsstón Bloncourt and Julio T. Rodrigues, in the early morning of December 19, 1947, in Santurce. At the request of attorney Antonio Quirós Méndez, who represented the defendant, the Court set June 9 for the sentencing.
the act of sentencing. The two assaults* for which he was found guilty yesterday resulted in Diaz Betancourt and Acevedo Castañeda receiving the sum of 814 pesos, a ring and a medal with the image of a saint. Acevedo Castañeda, Diaz Betancourt's accomplice, was declared mentally unfit to stand trial and is being held in a Santurce clinic for two years. Arrtptatido Appearing before Judge Ramírez Pabón yesterday, Díaz B"(Contlnued on page 18, Col. 5)
Vega Alia's Mayor and Assemblymen Withdraw their Resignations
Five days after Vega Alta Mayor José Vega Nevárez and the full municipal assembly members resigned from their posts in protest against the "lack of help" from the island authorities for the small municipality, all the resigning members decided, after a meeting with the district's senators, to definitively withdraw their resignations. Thursday night ended the "issue" of the municipality in Vega Alta, when the senators of the district, Juan Dávila Díaz and Carmelo Rodríguez García, met with Mayor Vega Nevárez and the municipal assemblymen, to look for a compromise formula that would resolve satisfactorily for both parties involved - the municipality of Vega Alta, on the one hand, and the Government leadership on the other - the issue raised by the former. No Statements made in the course of a laconic conRussia Accused Of Not Returning Prisoners Minister* Makes Clear 'Berlin Will Be Reunited. Soviet Retains Mileb By R. H.SHACKFORD LONDON, May 12.(PU)-The Big Three" vowed >tonight to strive to obtain the "réunlflcation" of Berlin by means of a free election, and accused Russia of still holding pristo, Ñngers a large number da soldier" and civile" from Japan, Germany and another" European palae". At the end of its fourth session, which lasted four hours, the Tre" Great Foreign Ministers issued two" communique", both dedicated to Germany. The communiqué on the prlalo. The communiqué on the war prisoners was in response to Russia's recent announcement that all German prisoners had been returned to their places of origin-an announcement which caused despair in thousands of German homes. The Big Troops accused Russia of having "a grave disregard for human rights in this matter. The statement on Berlin was a reiteration of earlier promises to stay in Berlin. It added: "In the meantime, the three governments will continue to try to obtain the renewal of the city through free elections so that Berlin can take its rightful place in a free and united Germany." The Russians offered last week to hold an "Ubres elections" but set many conditions, among them the withdrawal of all occupying troops from Ja city. Western troops would have to leave for West Germany; Russian troops could remain on the city's borders. The U.S. Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, British Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevln, and Russian Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, British Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevln, and Russian Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, will finish today. Ernest Bevln, and French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman will end their three-day conference tomorrow. On Monday, an all-day conference will begin." (Continued on page 18, Col. 5)
rrl JOSE VEGA NEVAREZ, the Mayor refused to reveal what promises, if any, were made by the senators to convince him and Jos. Assemblymen to drop their (Continued on Page 18-Col. 7? Means Found To Preserve BCG Vaccine Will Allow Testing Before Export, And Increase Production CHICAGO. mayTTi (PU)- Scientists said today that a new method of preserving BCG, a tuberculosis vaccine that is "at least eighty percent effective," will help in the fight to eradicate the disease. Dr. R. Rosenthal, of the Cook County Hospital Laboratory, reported that he has discovered a means of producing BCG in powdered form for the purpose of prolonging its usefulness. BCG in liquid form, brought from France by Rosenthal in 1934, lost its effectiveness ten days after manufacture. The production of BCG in powder form, Rosenthal said, will allow scientists to test it properly on animals, and then export it anywhere in the world. He added that previously there had been no time to test the vaccine, because in liquid form it lost its effectiveness too quickly. The new method, he continued, will allow to increase BCG production from ninety-seven thousand units annually to five million. Doctors have considered Rosenthal's discovery as the most important phase in the development of the vaccine since its discovery by two Frenchmen, Albert Calmette and Albert Guerin, in 1921. 10 Believed Killed In Plane Crash LONDON, May 12 (PU)- Ten members of the Royal Air Force are believed to have been killed yesterday when a Royal Air Force Lincoln bomber and a fighter plane collided in mid-air during maneuvers near Fayid. Egypt, the Air Ministry announced today.
WWCJgJr .i I I Jr k : Ja ■ I / 1 Lo* "eñnre" Jultn T. Rodríguez Jr, (left) and Gastón Bloncourt, were victims* of robberies, the commission of which Salvador Días Betancourt, who *pledged guilty yesterday before Jues Rodolfo Ramírez Pabón, was charged with. (Photo EL MUNDO.)
Deliveries Reduced To 2|3 Parts Muííoe Makes Public Appeal To Avoid Stockouts By Juan Martine* Chapel Editor of EL MUNDO As of today coffee stocks are frozen, according to an order issued yesterday by the General Supply Administration. The order provides for the rationing of coffee sales to two-thirds of the usual sales. The Governor, in a statement made yesterday, solicits the cooperation of the public to see that the rationing order is faithfully carried out, and to prevent the people from being deprived of the product or that higher prices are established, to the detriment of consumers, The" Government leaders have found no means of preventing the shipment of coffee to other countries where it now fares better than on this Island. The Administration maintains its policy of authorizing higher prices for the product than those fixed by law, prices which, according to reports, were determined after a study of production and marketing costs. By legislative action, on the recommendation of the Governor, funds for the purchase of coffee were withdrawn from the Admlnlsaradón da Suministro". Order Issued The situation is now such, the Government explains, that the people who consume less coffee in order to conserve some stock until the new crop arrives, will be totally deprived of the bean for some time. The rationing order issued yesterday by the General Manager of Supplies, which went into effect today, May 1,3, determines that all stocks of coffee in Fuerte Rica, beans or ground, held by wholesalers and retailers, dealers, roasters or any other person or entity engaged in the distribution of coffee, will be frozen and may only be sold, gassed or transferred in the following manner: "A. To customers who are accustomed to buying and selling coffee in Fuerte Rica. To the regular customers of wholesalers or retailers *or roasters, in an amount not exceeding two thirds (23) of the average consumption* of a month, taking as a basis the last quarter of the year 1949, and in no case in an amount exceeding the quota for a month. All deliveries made during the current month of May will be computed against the respective installment for that month. "B. to non-habitual customers, by means of special permits issued by the General Supply Manager by himself or by his delegate specially authorized for this purpose. The transfers or sales made by the farmers to Jos. wholesalers or retailers, dealers, roasters or any other person or entity, shall be frozen in the possession of those who receive them from the very moment in which said transfer is made, and the amounts thus transferred shall be subject to the provisions of Clause "A" of Section One of this Order. Every wholesaler or wholesale dealer, dealer, roaster, roaster, person or entity distributing coffee, in beans or ground, will be obliged to keep a clear and precise record of the sales made, which must conform to the provisions of this Rationing Order, and will also keep a record of the stocks in his possession at the time this Order enters into force and of the additional quantities of coffee in beans or ground, which he receives for sale or distribution while this Order is in force. The reports relating to stocks, purchases and sales shall be available to the Administrator General of Supply or his* agents or deputies for inspection at any time during the term of this Order. Violation of the provisions*" of this order, which has the force of law. may be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000 and imprisonment for a term of not less than three months nor more than two years. The Governor's statements on coffee were as follows: "Today the General Administrator of Supplies has issued an order providing for a moderate rationing of coffee in Puerto Rico. This order, in addition to the compliance it must have because of its force of law, deserves the fullest cooperation from both the consuming public and the distributing trade. The reasons are the following: -35 ' . In the last" months practically all of us have become accustomed to the (Continued on page 16, CoL 61
Arecibo Has Largest Rural Population
Census Work on Muñoz Report Muñoz Believes Final Figure Will Be 2,180,000.- Housing Data By RURTCO E.RTVERA EL MUNDO Staff members of the Federal Census Bureau in Puerto Rico continue to work actively on the final report they will present to Governor Luis Muñoz Marín on the main aspects of the population, housing and agricultural censuses. In the last few days, they have been working on the "cleaning'' of the numbers submitted to the Central Office in San Juan by the group chiefs and supervisors who are still active in the Census Bureau. It is understood that the final population figure that Governor Muñoz Marín will receive will not be very different from the figure already published by this newspaper, which registered a total population of about 2,180,000. Importance of Cities One aspect of all the work done by the Census Bureau 03 is that which places the Island's largest cities in terms of population importance. Rio Piedras surpassed the city of Ponce in population. Also San Juan Viejo, the hull, has lost population. According to our calculations and based on published figures, the order of po* blaclonal importance of the most important cities in Puerto Rico is as follows: San Juan, including Santurce. will be the first, with a population estimated at around 219 - 000 inhabitants; Rio Piedras will have approximately 120,500 people", (not including the Asylum, Sanitarium and the Presidio); Ponce will have a little more than 99,000 souls; Mayagüez, around 58,500; Caguas, around 33,500; Arecibo around 28,000; Guayama around 19,000 and Humacao, about 11,000 inhabitants. All the above information corresponds to the urban area only, excluding the rural area, (Continued on P. 18-Col. 8) -' ' ' Comenta Magazine Salary of 75c. Oiré If Implemented Here Would Destroy Economy NEW YORK~May 12. (PU) -The authoritative Business Week magazine said in an article today that raising Puerto Rico's minimum wage to 75 cents an hour would destroy the island's vigorous industrial expansion campaign. The article, titled "Puerto Rico Reaches for Industry," described Puerto Rico's economy as the "most stable and prosperous" in the Caribbean area. But," the article adds, "a minimum wage of 75 cents an hour would bankrupt the island's industry and stifle its commerce. The minimum wages set for Puerto Rico may well determine whether the island returns to poverty and complete economic dependence or continues to move toward self-sufficiency.'' The article notes that hearings will soon begin on minimum wage recommendations for various types of industries, submitted by the tripartite Puerto Rican industrial committees, composed of representatives of the unions, employers, and churches or universities. "At the end of the day, it is up to William R. McComb, administrator of Time and Salaries, to put into effect the new "salary scale, one of the best opinions in Puerto Rico that he has the future of the island in his hands.