THE WORLD
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Partly to occasionally cloudy with scattered showers today and tonight. Moderate east northeasterly winds with occasional thunderstorms. IN SAN JUAN. YESTERDAY: - High. 78 degrees: low, 09 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:89 p.m., 30.07 inches of mercury.
NURVA YORK, Jan. 20. (FU). - Bn le afternoon today slgulentee temperatures were reported": New York, 29: Chicago, 29; Wáahingtan, 32; Miami, 78. Predictions for tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: clear and cold with the mAe high temperature near 85.
DIARY OF^"=^|THE MORNING
THE FIRST AND ONLY DAILY NEWSPAPER IN PORT RITO WITH ABC CERTIFIED CIRCULATION
YEAR XXX
Entered as second class matter, Post Office. Ban Juan. P. B.
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JANUARY 21, 1950
NUMBER 13911
FIVE CENTS
Leaders Give Outlook For 4950
Descartes Claims Favorable Opinion Is Divided On Trade. Larri ón Sees No Basis For Fears By CARI.OS~NTEVES rivera Editor of EL MUNDO ti newborn affín of 1950 has -been greeted by the men who run Puerto Rican Government, banking, Industry and commerce, with sentiments ranging from rosy optimism - to gloomy pessimism. This writer interviewed five government leaders, four leaders of banking, industry and commerce, and one federal official. Of the five government spokesmen, two were optimistic about the economic outlook for 1950, and three presented a picture of gloom in which optimism is balanced against existing or looming economic adversity. Among the leaders of commerce, industry and private banking, one did not comment directly, but indicated my black pessimism; another conditioned the progress of the "battle of production" in 1950 on the attitude of the Government and the workers' organizations to the problems affecting the very life of private industry. On the contrary, a leader of commerce was frankly optimistic, and one of the banking sector presented the favorable and adverse factors of the economic panorama, concluding that "it is to be expected that the business of the Island will continue in a satisfactory manner". The Treasurer of Puerto Rico, Sol Luis Descartes, stated: "I consider the economic outlook for 1950 to be favorable. The main reason I feel this way is that economists in the United States almost unanimously consider the economic outlook for the nation to be very favorable, and the economic situation in the United States is the main factor determining the economic situation in Puerto Rico. 1 There are, however, two or three factors of much greater importance to the island economy than to the national one. "The size of the cane crop and the amount of cane that can be sold at a remunerative price is of great significance to our economy. In this sector of the island economy there is uncertainty caused by a probable oobtant. Therefore, the ability of the United States to absorb that surplus will influence the degree of economic well-being that may prevail in Puerto Rico. Mixed Perspective "Another factor: federal outlays, expenditures and aid. In this area, the outlook is mixed: on the one hand, the reduction of military expenditures and the gradual reduction of benefits to veterans in school seem likely. On the other hand, disbursements from public home projects subsidized and guaranteed by the Federal Government can already be expected by osa date: veterans will receive dlvldendoj^ checks this year-and' there are good prospects for Federal Government aid to the States under various headings. "The outlook for revenue is good, and collections from almost ' all tax lines increased in 1949. In general, the outlook is favorable? Rafael Picó, president of the Planning Board, which is in charge of the planning of public finances, expressed his opinion that "1950 promises to continue to be a year of great prosperity for Puerto Rico. Our economy depends greatly on the situation in the United States and there is nothing in prospect in the continental economy to indicate any danger of economic setback. Moreover, the U.S. economy has been able to weather the recent decline in prices without substantially affecting income and employment levels." "Locally, the restrictions on the sugar Industry, which will be felt more strongly this year, are a factor against, but it is hoped that the measures recommended by the Government and the producing entities will help to solve the problem. "In *the other important industries there is no substantial change that can be predicted as an unfavorable factor. On the contrary the construction industry will have a great boom under the auspices of the governmental public works" program, and by the effect of] vast home plan sponsored jointly by the Insular Government and the Federal Government." 9200,000 In Bankruptcy The Insular Chamber of Wholesale Merchants chose not to comment officially, but unofficially one of its directors showed the author a number of documents while stating laconically: "In the first "e(Continued on p. 10, col. 4),
Signing of the Agreement Expedites Beginning of the Sugar Harvest
■OI, áMBb í r*' "" RuW jwL ■ y ¿ / ' ' ' < jl i wPem ?"> \ i i - <4 - J Sw ' ® I ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ¿ i
Yesterday afternoon, the collective bargaining agreement between the Sugar Producers Association and the Sugar Union was signed at the offices of the aforementioned employers' organization. Seated from left to right are: Ramón Alvares Conde, Aureo B. García, Ro-
hert Goodwin, Fernando A. Villamil. Tomáa Méndez Mejíae, Pedro Vega Berrios, Juan B. Garcia Méndez, Armando Rivero, Pedro G. Goyco, Armando Sánchez, Jeaús María Ríos and an unidentified labor leader. Surrounding them are other labor leaders (Photo EL MUNDO).
Johnson Asked For Extension Of Selective To Be Extended He Implied He Would Accept Military Measure If Necessary By Tawrence Smith WASHINGTON, Jan. 20 (PU) - Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson, implied that he would accept the military measure if it was necessary. Louis Johnson today intimated that the armed services would accept a draft law that could be invoked at a time of need by Congress or the President. He first asked the House Armed Services Committee to extend the current selective service law, which expires on June 24, to show Russia "that we intend to stand strong. After Chairman Cari Vinson, D-Georgia, made it known that there was no draft last year, Johnson indicated that a law that could be invoked in an emergency might be satisfactory. But this would include preservation of the selective service system, continued enrollment and classification of men as young as 18 years of age. Along with this, Vlnson suggested that the power to actually draft enrollees should be subordinated to a joint resolution of Congress. Al Abrigo Johnson went on the record. He asked, "Would such a plan include the power of the President to order the draft if an emergency arose while Congress was not in session. Now it was Vlnson's turn to put on his coat. He commented that "we always seem to be facing some kind of emergency." -'Johnson refused to give final approval to a law invocable in times of emergency, but said he would discuss the matter with President Truman, probably on Monday, and would give a definite reply to the Committee later. hos Congressmen who face re-election campaigns in the fall have indicated that they would vote against extending the present law, but might agree to an emergency bill. Johnson argues Speaking in favor of unconditional extension, Johnson stated these reasons: 1. It would reassure the nations in the Atlantic Pact, and the rest of the world, that this pals is intended to keep it militarily strong. 2. It would stimulate voluntary recruitment. 3. The $11,000,000,000 needed every year to keep recruiting "like a machine with an idle engine" would be a "prudent investment which we cannot afford not to make. 4. Be a "precious economy" in time in case of an emergency (Continued on p. 14, Col. 2).
At four o'clock yesterday afternoon the collective bargaining agreement was signed between the Sugar Producers Association and the Sugar Union, which establishes wages and working conditions for the members of said workers' organization during the year 1950.
AT To Be Built At Santa Isabel Terminal Building To Be Used While Ponce Airport Is Being Built The Transportation Authority will build a new terminal building at the Santa Isabel airport to be used while the new airport is being built in the city of Ponce. The Director of the Transportation Authority, Mr. Salvador V. Caro, informed yesterday that the TA has been making provisional repairs to the existing building, in order to speed up the establishment of flights between San Juan and Santa Isabel-as a measure to reconnect San Juan with the southern part of the Island. As it is known, the current airport in the city of Ponce has been closed by the Civil Aeronautics Administration, for not meeting the minimum safety conditions required," said the Authority Administrator, adding that the repairs being made are being made on a provisional basis to use the old building while the new one is being built, in order to speed up the reestablishment of air service. He also indicated that to totally reconstruct the old building would cost more than the new building, which, although a little smaller, will offer all the comforts for the passengers as well as for the line that will operate the service while the Ponce airport is being built. Funds Allocated* In the Seventh Economic Program, for the consideration of Governor Muñoz Marín, it was stated that the following funds will be allocated for the construction of the Ponce airport.
The signing of the contract,* the sixth agreed upon and signed between the APA and the Union, took place at the offices of the employer's entity, attended by the respective agreement committees of both parties. The agreement was ratified earlier in the day by an assembly of the Council of Unions of the Union, which is composed of the leaders of the local unions on the Island. This meeting began at eleven o'clock in the morning in the caucus room of the Legislature, under the chairmanship of Mr. Pedro Vega Berrios. He opened the meeting, and then asked Mr. Armando Rivero, secretary general of the SA, to explain and comment on the clauses of the agreement applicable to agricultural and factory workers. At Mr. Rivero's conclusion, the two phases of the agreement were unanimously approved by the assembly. It was agreed, however, that *1 Union reserved the right to demand of the APA. that any concession made by a member of the Association to another Independent union, in excess of the provisions of the agreement, be extended to the Union, Los Miamos Jornale* As reported, the agreement agreed upon between the APA and the Union provides for the same wages as were paid during the harvest and dead time last year. However, the APA agreed this year to the demand to establish the "check-off" (deduction by the employer of the workers' dues for the Union), in the agricultural phase of the industry. The contract sets minimum wages ranging from $1.40 to $2.20 for laborers working on Interior farms, and from $1.50 to $2.35 for laborers working on nonInterior farms in the agricultural phase. To these minimums shall be added in addition *'the corresponding increase as provided in the Determination of the United States Secretary of Agriculture dated December 2, 39f9. and also an additional amount of one cent per eight-hour work day". The agreement applicable to the manufacturing phase provides for basic wages ranging from 51-1.4 cents per hour to 61-1.4 cents per hour for laborers employed in the factory; and 51-1.4 cents and 62-1.2 cents per hour for those employed on the railroad. It further provides that if the price of sugar rises above $6.00, the wages shall be increased at the rate of one-half cent per hour, for every ten or fraction of ten that the price rises, and if the price falls below $5.60, the wages shall also be reduced at the rate of one-half cent per hour for every ten or fraction of ten that the price falls. This clause further provides that in no case shall the wage rate be less than 40 cents (Continued on p. 14, Col. 7).
Observers Say U.N. Will Cease Boycott Of Spain Observers Say Issue To Be Discussed At Next Assembly By Bruce W. Munn LAKE SUCCESS, Jan. 20. Observers said today that the United Nations is virtually certain to lift its boycott of diplomatic recognition of Spain at "the next meeting of the General Assembly. The announcement by Secretary of State Dean Acheson that the United States wishes to exchange diplomatic representation with the government of Generalissimo Francisco Franco was seen as the main force needed to end the diplomatic ban ordered by the United Nations since 1946. The issue is certain to come up either at the spring special session or at the next meeting of the General Assembly next fall. Actually, officials believe that if Washington had given a similar "go ahead" last fall, the question of rescinding action against Spain would have been raised then. Jerusalem Affair The date on which the Spanish affair was to be considered was connected with (Continued on p. 14, Col. 6)
E. U.S. Willing to Break Off Relations With Bulgaria
For EDWARD V. ROBERTS WASHINGTON, Jan. 20. (PU>The United States informed Bulgaria today that unless it withdraws its request for the recall of U.S. Minister Donald R. Heath, the United States will break off diplomatic relations with the red satellite in the Balkans. The U.S. position was made known in a note delivered to Peter Voutov, in charge of Bulgarian affairs, at the State Department at noon today. A similar note was delivered to the Bulgarian Foreign Office in Sofia.
of Bulgaria in Sofia. The note stated that unless Bulgaria withdrew its demand for the removal of Heath, "the United States Government would conclude that the Bulgarian Government did not wish to maintain normal diplomatic relations. "Under these circumstances the United States Government will be obliged to withdraw the Bulgarian diplomatic mission, and request the withdrawal of the Bulgarian diplomatic mission in the United States." The American note was a (Continued on p. 14,' Col. 1)
Hawaii Ready to Adopt Constitution
Then Will Apply for Admission to Union Believe Precedent Would Be Effective In Case of Puerto Rico By WnXTAM DORVILUER WASHINGTON, Jan. 20. (WnXTAM DORVILUER World Correspondent) -There is ample precedent for the people of a territory to adopt their own constitution before any congressional action, and the people of Hawaii will take such action independently. In a general election to be held on March 21, Hawaiian voters will elect 63 delegates to a Constitutional Convention to begin April 4, 1950, for the purpose of forming a constitution and state government. Such" elections were authorized by the Legislature in a law permitting a constitutional convention to be held in the territory. Although there has been no action by the U.S. Congress for the admission of Hawaii to statehood, the territory expects to be the sixteenth to hold a convention and adopt a constitution prior to any congressional action on statehood. The states that acted individually prior to congressional action were Ark'an "as, Callfornia, Florida, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Michigan, Oregon, Tennessee, Vermont, Texas, West Virginia and Wyoming. Where the leaders of the Government of Puerto Rico propose to ask Congress to make possible legislation that would allow the people to convene a constitutional convention to draft a constitution, the 15 states that acted as territories in drafting their constitutions took action first and then submitted their constitutions for approval by the National Government. Hawaii's sweat lodge differs in another respect from the proposed plan for Puerto Rico, in that Hawaii's constitution will be a state constitution and will form a state government, to be submitted to Congress for approval. State Government, to be submitted to Congress for speedy admission to the Union. Puerto Rico seeks only to adopt its own constitution, without the document containing the establishment of a State Government to be admitted to the Union. The precedent, however, has sufficient weight for Puerto Rico to take action without prior Congressional approval and, it is assumed, to be as effective in Puerto Rico's effort to adopt a constitution of its own as it was for the state constitutions adopted by 15 territories in the past, and presently under process of adoption by the people of Hawaii. In a recent speech in Hawaii, Samuel Wilder Kln'g, chairman of the Hawaii Statehood Commission, summarized the aspirations of the people of the territory in a 30-year struggle for statehood, and the constitutional convention proceedings aimed at statehood, saying: (Continued on page 14, Col. D
Efforts Postponed Will Wait Until Feb. 2 To Continue Battleship Missouri Rescue Efforts
NORFOLK, Virginia, Jan. 20, (PU)- The Navy today abandoned efforts to disentangle the battleship Missouri, the U.S. Navy's only active-duty battleship, after 21 ships struggled to free it from the mud bank for two hours and failed to move it. The Navy suspended rescue efforts until February 2 when the high tide is expected to peak. Navy spokesmen said that the high tide each day is lower than the previous day, and that the high tide will peak in two weeks. Today was the day the Navy made most efforts to rescue the 45,000-ton battleship, which ran aground on a mud bank on Tuesday. "Unsuccessful Seia* ships on each side t and four Coast Guard vessels pulled the Missouri today. without success. The Missouri is the favorite ship of President Truman, who promised at the launching ceremony that she would not be withdrawn from active service as long as he was President.
Missouri's godmother was Margaret Truman. The battleship Missouri played an important role in World War II and the surrender ceremonies of the Japanese Empire took place on her deck. Last year she was in Puerto Rico, participating in the maneuvers that took place on the island of Vieques, and Captain W. D. Brown, commander of the battleship Missouri, ran aground in the Chesapeake Bay. (Associated Press photo).
In 1947 it had been used by President Truman for his goodwill trip to the capital of Brazil. The accident suffered by the Missouri near Point Comfort, Virginia, occurred on the battleship's maiden voyage under the command of Captain William D. Brown, of Jacksonville, Florida. It was first believed that the accident was due to the Navy's failure to use the services" of the bay pilots, and that she had entered water* not deep enough for a ship of such a draft. But the Navy reported yesterday that the theorized ran aground while testing a new acoustic instrument and that for this reason it had not taken care to call on the services of the bay pilots. All one thousand four hundred men and seventy-one officers on the Missouri were unhurt. The ship was bound for Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, when it was involved in an accident. The Navy said the MI Suri will have to undergo extensive repairs if her bottom has been damaged.
Governor Says He Would Not Shun Powers Of Law
LUIS MUNOZ MARIN Perez Requests Greater Attention To Scholarship Law In A Communication To Department Heads He Points Out Its Benefits By RU~RICÓ~e7 RIVERA Editor of EL MUNDO The director of the Personnel Office, Mr. Manuel A. Perez, has addressed several" heads of parliaments and corporations" of the Insular Government, requesting them to give greater interest to the Scholarship Law which permits the granting of leave" with "ueldo" to government employees" to carry out! to carry out their studies. Mr. Perez points out that during the current fiscal year and since the new Scholarship Law came into effect, very little use has been made of the provision allowing scholarships to employees for studies. Better Public Administration Mr. Perez also points out in his letter that the training of employees, through scholarships granted by the Government," helps to create a better public administration. The text of the 1a eerta from the Director of Personnel to the heads of departments, mantos and public corporations" is expressed as "lgue: "Law number 136, approved on April 28, 1949, empowers the Director of Personnel to grant llcen. das with pay for studies to employee" of the Insular Government. "These leaves of absence may be granted by the Director Bolamente upon the proposal and recommendation of the head of the department or agency of which the applicant is an officer or employee. Note Little Use "We have noticed that in the present fiscal year and since the new Scholarship Law came into effect, very little use has been made of this provision. This is a magnificent opportunity to provide effective training to employees in certain technical or professional stages of service who have not yet reached full development in Puerto Rico. "This Office has deemed it necessary, therefore, to invite your attention to these aspects of the Act with a view to having the agency take the necessary steps to send * study any or some" of its employees under the provisions of the aforementioned Act. Timeliness "Most American universities require that applications for admission be filed not less than three months, and if possible earlier, before the date of the commencement of the course. Accordingly, we believe that this is an opportune time for the various agencies to study the training needs of their employees for the next fiscal year and to submit to us their training needs for the next fiscal year and to submit to us their training needs for the next fiscal year.
Explains Case Of Says Faculty Is Dangerous Weapon When There Is Political Discrepancy By Juan Martines Chanel EL MUNDO Staff Writer . The Governor, Mr. Luis Muñoz Marín, has expressed that he would not shy away from any responsibility, nor would he advocate a policy of outsiders, in any matter, no matter how delicate and important it may be, as long as that responsibility conferred by law entails a principle of sound administrative policy. At the assembly of mayors, held on Thursday, there arose, it was reported, opposition to the policy of hand" out that de "ea wumlr the Governor in the" friction" that "urged between mayor" and municipal aiambleaa. This opposition stems from statements made that the Governor has expressed that he does not like to assume the corresponding responsibility in these local administrative conflicts. The Governor, as he has manlfeelelado, does not shy away from any responsibility that ladey imposes, whether he likes it or not. Dangerous Anna However, in the case of powers to remove a mayor or member of a municipal assembly, for the sole offense of discres par a mayor, the Governor considers it a dangerous weapon that could be misused by a more partisan political governor than a judicious and calm head of the public administration. Not because he does not like to take responsibility, but as a matter of principle, the Governor is in favor of amending the present municipal law, in the sense of changing the system of disltutioneo currently in force for mayors or assemblymen who disagree. In this regard, Mr. Mufioi Marín expressed: "It is not a good principle, nor does it establish a good pre. cedent, that the Governor has by law the right and authority to intervene in conflicts between the Chaldean and municipal assemblies in the exercise of powers that the law grants to the Governor." It is not Good Politics As it has been expressed the Governor now either is the president of a majority party or is the main leader of that party or a person who has the strength of the party that triumphed in the elections, There may be mayors or municipal assemblymen who are adversaries of that Governor, or who being co-religionists" separate themselves from the Governor's party. It is not "considered good politics that the president of a party has by law the right to remove persons elected by the people, because they disagree among themselves, when an unscrupulous executive" could create and foment the "discrepancy" and would have, in addition, sufficient power to influence the appointment of the senators in charge of making the "Investigations" and to subscribe the recommendations of the case. If the Governor is the president of the majority party, he would be justified, as stated, to intervene in the discrepancies among his co-religionists, but in his capacity as president of the party, not as Governor. Example*, the "idea" now expressed by Governor Muñoz Marín, he had been thinking about since before the elections. Mayor Fernando Millán, of Aguadilla, and Mayor Miguel Ro. "ado, of Toa Baja, were elected on the Popular Party ballot; however, due to ideological discrepancies, they abandoned that party to fight on the side of the 'oooslclón, there was talk of creating conflicts between the municipal assemblies. । pales and those mayors so that they would intervene in accordance with the law, ' a Senate commission to recommend to the Governor the measures he deemed convenient so that the conflict would cease. Mr. Muñoz Marín then "was against the procedure, believing it to be a bad precedent. (Continued on p. 14, Col. 5).
José Ferrer Agrees To Participate In Series Of 3 New Films
HOLLYWOOD, Jan. 20, (PU)Puerto Rican actor José Ferrer's portrayal of the Dauphin of France in the film Joan of Arc has apparently placed him among Hollywood's most sought-after actors. Ferrer will join producer and actor Burt Lancaster in a film trilogy" under the title Spice of Life. The author of the trilogy is Jame Thurber. The first of the three films, under the title Catbirds Seat, will star Ferrer. Burt Lancaster will star in the second.
The second, which is as yet untitled. Jose Ferrer's second film, in which he appears with Gen* Tierney and Richard Conte, was recently released in New York City, and although critics found it weak, they praised Jose's performance, saying his work surpassed that of the other stars." This film, to be shown under the title Whlrpool, was directed by Otto Preminger for 20th Century Fox, and adapted by Ben Hecht, from a play by Guy Endore.