EL MONDO DIARIO MARANA ' ' '
WEATHER FORECASTS PASSES THE ISLAND. BOTi - Medium cloudy, with ■ MtaMeAn man lea nriai ■■■■■ ■ ■ ■KuacrroB qiriwfmob rn imb prime ma early morning hours. IN SAN JUAN, YESTERDAY i - Maximum temperature, M degrees; minimum, 74 s r ad o- Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:88 do Ib afternoon, "A7 inches do mercury.
NEW YORK, Sept. 8. (FU). - This afternoon rigulentee tes -temperatures were reported; New York, 88; Wáshlngton, 81; Chicago, 78; Miami, 88, Forecasts for tomorrow my New York and neighboring cities: considerably cloudy. Maximum temperature: between 75 and 80.
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXXI
*Offiea?8an Juan?
Enter Pool <
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 9, 1950
NUMBER 14135 FIVE CENTS
Señorita Puerto Rico Ovacionada en Prueba de Talento.
j * ill jH I _-" ,
ATLANTIC CITY, N.J., Sept. 8. - (PU)-The beautiful and talented Evangelina Moreton, who represents Puerto Rico in the annual bollix contest to choose Miss America of I860, finishes her tryouts tonight. Her first competition against 38 other beauties was in evening gown. Last night she demonstrated her skills in that important section of the pageant, > tonight she would have to present herself before the critical eyes of the judges, in a trusa. Although Evangelina did not perform in the talent test, she won the audience's sympathy on this occasion by playing the guitar and singing a native song. Bob Rusnell, master of ceremonies, had to call the black-haired beauty three times, to answer the ovado- neo that they paid tribute to her.
neo tributes to her. In the photograph on the left we see her parading in her carriage, adorned with Spanish motifs, dressed as a Spaniard and playing a guitar. On the right she appears as she appeared in the evening gown competition (Photos by César González and Associated Press). In New York, Carlos Montalbán, impresario of the Puerto Bico Theater announced today that Evangelina Moragón, who represents the Island in the beauty pageant currently being held in Atlantic City, will be presented on Wednesday from the stage of the coliseum. Miss Puerto Bico will be performing several songs. (Continued on Page 16, Col. 2)
Selective has Accepted 502 Youths Group of 242 to Begin Arriving at Camp September 18-22 By DARR" CARLO ny Puerto Ricans have so far been accepted for entrance into the armed forces, out of a total of 3,310 candidates sent by the Selective Service in Puerto Rico and interviewed at the Port Buchanan Recruiting Center. Army Headquarters in San Juan also reported yesterday that of the 502 accepted, a group of 343 will begin arriving in camp to wear military uniforms from September 18 through September 33, at a daily rate of 50. These young men accepted into the Army are now enjoying the 21-day period granted them to settle their private affairs. The remaining group of 280 will be called to camp for active military service at a later date. Of the total number of young men sent so far by the Selective Service to Camp Buchanan Recruiting Center, 503 were accepted. The 340 men who will report for active military service from September 18 to 33 are from the Selective Service's first call-up of about 800 applicants on the island. On the other hand, five registrants with felon status, out of a total of 103 such conditions who have been interviewed so far at Buchanan, were accepted and immediately entered active military service, and a new call-up of 18,000 registrants, from which an additional 3,000 will be selected for active military service, has forced the military authorities to take steps to expand the number of registrants at the Buchanan Receiving Center. This center will be moved to a larger area in order to be able to adequately serve the new call-up registrants who present themselves for interview. The Recruiting Center will be moved to the facilities located across the street from the Fort Buchanan Commissary, where there are a number of booths that will provide housing for the registrants. They will remain in camp, according to what was said yesterday, until the entire interviewing and testing procedure is completed and they are either accepted or rejected. They will sleep in the huts located in front of the M0*Aj'lMa Police Station. By agreement between the military authorities and the Selective Service on the Island, from September 11 until September 15, a total of 330 registered persons will begin to arrive daily at the Reception Center, from the previous and the new Selective Service call-up.
-1 22
Situation Considered Serious On Allied Taegu-Pohang Line
Suspicious Cases Reported : Rabies in Vega Baja Neighborhood A Dog Bit Several People and Another Dog. The latter attacked a teacher and dogs with puppies New suspected cases* of rabies occurred in the Algarrobo neighborhood of Vega Baja, when a dog owned by Miguel Rivera bit several people and another dog. The latter bit another group of people, among them a teacher of public education. According to the information provided by the interim Chief of the Department's Sanitation Bureau, the dog bit another group of people, including a public school teacher.
According to information provided by the Acting Chief of the Health Department's Sanitation Bureau. "According to the information provided by the Acting Chief of the Department of Health Sanitation Department, ehofMMir Romney Joseph, the attacks took place about three weeks ago in the Algarrobo neighborhood of Vega Baja. From the investigation carried out by doctors Abel de Juan, head of the Health Department's Epidemiology Bureau, and Gonzalez Calderln, veterinarian, a dog owned by Don Miguel Rivera, suddenly changed its behavior, and in a fit of rage bit the child Wilfredo Rivera and Mr. Eduardo Andino. Later the animal started running around the neighborhood and bit another dog owned by Mr. Antonio Mejhs. The bitten dog immediately showed the same symptoms of its attacker, and ran to the house of neighbor Abraham Sanchez, in the Collazo neighborhood. Bites a Professor In the house of the latter, the dog Antonio Mejias attacked and bit a dog named Canela, which raises eight puppies, some of which he also bit. From (Continued on page 16, Col. 6)
Rector Rules On The Selective Was Agreed Meeting With Colom. - Students Will Finish Semester Information obtained by EL MUN DO indicates that college students who are of military draft age, according to the appeal made by federal authorities, will at least be able to finish the current college semester before action is taken on their cases. According to a study being conducted by the university administration, about 193 students, to date, fall under the age of conscription, i (Continued on page 16, Col. 8)
Economic Controls Bill Signed President May Freeze Prices Statute Penalizes Hoarding. - Board Bans Installment Sales * By MEBBIMAN SMITH WASHINGTON, Sept. 8. (P. U.)-President Truman today signed the economic controls bill. which gives him full powers to ration scarce goods, freeze prices and salaries and mobilize the home front for the Korean war. The Federal Reserve Board con. called immediately for a Press conference to announce antllnflaclonar restrictions, such as the prohibition of installment sales of the type of a dollar a pron. to and a dollar a week. Mr. Truman will explain his new powers in a radio address to the Nation at half past ten tomorrow night. It is expected that in the speech he will explain in detail the sacrifices that will have to be made and how far the leash must be tightened. The law was passed by the Congress after weeks of debate. Punishes Hoarding In addition to the authority to impose controls and restrictions on credits, the statute authorizes severe penalties for hoarding, hoarding and aglotlzmo. It provides for scarce ríals, and for controls on appropriations for new cons, tractions. Mr. Traman signed the measure into law without comment, since he had not originally requested authority to freeze prices and salaries and ration scarce commodities and finally agreed to them when the Congress agreed to let him have the final say as to how and when they would be used. However, he stressed that he would not resort to them for the time being. If the controls are imposed later, they may apply to a single line item or to several or all of them. But the President will be obliged to freeze wages as soon as he freezes prices. Price Freeze And if a substantial part of the economy were placed under the controls, he would be obliged to decree a general freeze on prices and wages. The measure also authorizes the (Continued on Page 16, Col. 1)
President Approves Pension Plan To Be Paid Dependency Pensions President To Study Rules To Allow Married With Children To Serve WASHINGTON, Sept. 8 (PU)-President Traman signed into law the bill authorizing dependency pensions for members of the armed services. The action cleared the way for the recruitment of men with dependents. Dependents of members of the armed services will receive monthly checks of 885, 8107.50, 3125, 8127.50, 3125, 8127.50 and 3125, 8127.50. 3125, 8127.50, 8145, 8147.50, or 8165. depending on the number of dependents and rank of the enlisted man. Of the total pension, the serviceman will contribute 840, 360 or 880 of his pay, depending on his rank. Selective Service officers are expected to request President Truman to revise Selective Service regulations which currently prevent the enlistment of men with dependents. Before draft boards begin calling fathers, Congress will probably amend the Selective Service Act to raise the maximum age limit - currently 35 - in order to take advantage of age-eligible bachelors. Congress will also consider the desirability of calling up unmarried veterans under the draft. The new dependency pension law covers only dependent spouses, children and parents. Other relatives will not be considered dependents for purposes of payments, but may be considered for deferment cases. Technically, the checks will be known as housing allowances. Officers are not covered by the new law because, in cases where the Army does not provide lodging facilities, they receive additional checks ranging from 360 to 8150. The new payments are not automatic. However, in some cases where the men do not request them, the secretary of the service to which they belong, after due study, may order the extension of the checks and >- ha(Contlnued on page 16, Col. 6)
Our graphic editor Lula de Casenave took this exclusive photograph of Miguel Cirilo Batalla, when dressed as a prisoner and handcuffed, he left the District Court in San Juan, on his way to the Insular Penitentiary, followed by a prison guard. The convict appeared in court Thursday afternoon, but refused to testify in the case against Lucas Castro Anguita, alleging that his case is on appeal before the Supreme Court and that his statement could be detrimental to him at this time. (Photo by EL MUNDO). The case against Lucas Castro Anguita was closed yesterday, shortly after 11:00 a.m., when the defense finished offering its defense evidence. m The defense was limited to presenting only six witnesses and consumed little more than an hour in presenting its evidence.
Prosecutor Angel Viesa* Martinez,*" who with special prosecutor general Baldomcro Freyre has led the prosecution against Castro Anguita, did not accept a proposal by Felix Ochoteco, of the defense council, to submit the case without reports. Prosecutor Viera Martinez also did not accept the defense's invitation to allow the court to limit the duration of the Reports, "because he wished to unburden himself, pronouncing the speech he had been preparing for some time." The presentation of the evidence of the accused began at 9:30 in the morning, with the offer by the defense of 1* statement given to the prosecutors on January 9 of this year, by Rosaly Miranda Colón, main prosecution witness, whose testimony was challenged by the lawyers of Csstro, Anguita in last Thursday's session. . Two other testimonies given by the same witness before the Court, (Continued on Page 16, Col. 7).
Hearings Begin Monday; Laborers In Michigan Main Objective Will Be to Achieve Form Improve Working Conditions By Luis Sanchez Cappa EL MUNDO Staff Writer Next Monday, the President's Commission on Migrant Worker Problems will begin public hearings in Michigan to try to obtain evidence on how to improve the safe working and living conditions of 30,000 workers.
President Truman Offers Excuses to Marines and They Applaud Warmly
President Truman (standing at right) personally apologizes to the members of the Marine Corps League at their annual meeting in Washington, saying: "when I make a mistake I am willing to correct it," He was referring to j gyi f tefif 48M iíDA A Uto eofl r f f b éh i fia ollA ▼ ss^a*esevwtmw vmvu aoaaw uwe M w w waa S was vg w
- ciated that the Marines were merely Uu poli- - cystic force" that had "a propaganda machine cari equal to that of - Ntalln." To the "anthro vsmm a loe delegates to the convention when । applaud standing up, after hearing their commander read the "arta dai President, where he made his excuses. A ladsraohavfc-
moe to General Clifton Cates (Isqulerds), commander of the Uga, while shaking hands with President Truman and saying "Noe- - others loe Infantee de Merina admlramoaíel courage and especially personal courage." The President sent pjnero the letter and then personally comJXtecló before ta oonv "r.<". (Tote Atoned Press.) ,
May Isolate Defenders Airport Reds Five Miles from Kyongju Bad Weather Obstructed Allied Air Offensive.No Explanation of Retreat By EARNEST HOBERECHT TOKYO, Saturday, Sept. t, (PU)-The spearheads of three Communist divisions, preceded by tanks, and operating under a blanket of rain, "substanclally" cut our northern line of defense on Friday. TOKYO, Saturday: The entire northeast front of the United Nations, over a length of forty kilometers from Yongchon to the eastern coast, is in danger, and an American spokesman in the fighting said the situation is "very serious. That danger is due to the fact that the Communists are now threatening to outflank the American troops in the northeast corner of the defense perimeter and overrun the United Nations forces defending the Pohang airfield on the east coast. Also a new Communist offensive of vast proportions is threatening the southwest corner of the perimeter in the direction of the port of Masan. In reality the words "very i here and by ol Command of the Oe. tavo American Army in Korea, to all the line of dafanee from the eastern cnsta to Taegú, and from Taegú to the southern coast. South Korean forces fell back in three sectors of the twenty-five mile long front between Pohang and Yongchon, and by nightfall Friday the Communists were seriously threatening Allied units defending the Pohang airport and Yongchon, a vital communications center. The midnight communique from General Douglas MacArthur reported that United Nations troops were still holding Yongchon and were making some progress on the northeastern front. United Press correspondent Robert Bennyhoff, reporting from Kyongju, 17 miles south of Pohang, recounted the South Korean withdrawal and said it left the Allied flanks on the right and left completely exposed. Bennyhoff did not report the extent of the withdrawal of the South Korean Capital Division, along the mountains and among the rice plantations north of Kyongju, but presumably the enemy has now placed himself four-five miles from the city and only fifty miles from Pusan, our main supply base, by a direct road. Rain Dulls Aviation The torrential rains crippled the Allied air offensive and gave the Communists the best chance to reorganize their forces along the entire 100-mile defense perimeter. American officers expected the Communists to launch further heavy attacks, both in Taegu, at the northern end of the line, and in the Masan sector, at the southern end. "The next two days will be (Continued on page 16, Col. 3) Announce There Will Be Abundance In Next Harvest Coffee '* ' '-'i! The New York papers yesterday published releases reporting that officials of the U.S. Department of Agriculture believe that the prospects for a large increase in the coffee supply next year are very great. Officials in charge of estimating next year's coffee supply said that studies conducted to date in four major coffee-producing countries - Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala and Mexico - indicate that the crop beginning next month will be larger than normal for the coming year, In addition, coffee farmers, who supply half of the beans used in the United States, expect the next harvest to be much larger than in the last two years, when bad weather became a scourge for consumers and coffee growers.