THE NANDO
PBONOBTICOB OF TDEMPOB FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY t Partly cloudy with some isolated showers during the day and at night. IN BAN. JUAN, YESTERDAY: High, 88 degrees; low, 74 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 p.m., 89.88 inchesAw mercury.
NEW YORK, noriombre 14. (PU)_ Late today the following temperatures were reported: New York, 81| Chicago, 49 1 Washington, Miami, 79. Considerably cloudy and cold in the afternoon. High temperature: M.
10 A.M. DAILY MORNING
THE FIRST NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH CIRCULATION CERTIFIED BY THE ABC.
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan. P. R,
SAN* JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 1950
NUMBER 14212
FIVE CENTS
Allies Advance On Chinese Forces In Attempt To Force Them Into Decision
I Had A Plant In A Lung
I 9 9 ■ * 9 Sb I 1 |<Bi ■■ "JB^íB- fe'' 11 **'"■ , B".s^B i!t r : > ■ f''''^ & ■ ¿ ¿ ' ; > " x ft"'"/ < , V.,' uíW'- - Two-year-old ñifla, Patríela Fredelake, smiles from her ca" handle in a Kansas City hospital after a surgeon extracted* a tiny tyrasol plant from a lung. The girl's parents took her to the hospital to remove a rare object that X-rays showed was lodged in her lung. The sunflower seed has already germinated and developed roots (Associated Press photo). Measure Requires Identification Of All Bullet Purchasers" Senate Considers Amendment To Gun Sale Law. Requires Record Book of Transactions Before the Senate for consideration is a bill to amend the law that regulates the sale of firearms and mandates the declaration of firearms in whatever form they are possessed . - Do in accordance with the terms of section 5A to be added to dl-.
Senate Bill Amends Text of Act 53 Punishes the Assassination of Any Official to Overthrow Government Before the Senate for consideration is a bill to amend Act S¿ of 1948 to include as a felony the attempt to overthrow the Government of Puerto Rico by means of the assassination of any official of said Government or political subdivision thereof. - Likewise, said Act, which in its original text declared it a felony to encourage, advocate, advise or preach willfully or knowingly the necessity, desirability or convenience of overthrowing, destroying or paralyzing the Government of Puerto Rico by assassinating any officer of said Government or political subdivision thereof, as a felony, is hereby amended.
(Continued on p. 18, Col. 3) No amount of bullets, ammunition, cartridges, or projectiles of any kind shall be sold, given, donated, or delivered, or in any manner whatsoever transferred, unless in compliance with the requirements hereinafter provided. Text of the Amendment The text of the amendment to the law, copied to the letter of the bill filed in the Senate, is as follows: "Article 5A- No person may sell, assign, donate, deliver or in any manner transfer bullets, ammunition, cartridges or projectiles of any kind to any person, unless he/she has been issued a license for the sale of firearms as prescribed in Article 5 of this Act. No quantity of bullets, ammunition, cartridges or projectiles of any kind shall be sold, assigned, donated, delivered or in any way transferred: / a) In violation of any of the provisions of this Law; or b) unless the seller personally knows the buyer and the latter presents clear proof of his identity, and unless the buyer has been issued a license for the sale of firearms as prescribed in article 5 of this Law.
Guards Beat 59 Inmates
10 Are Serious, Says Attorney General Accepted Resignation of Prison Chief - Nine Among Nine Delivered the Beatings By BENJAMIN SANTANA Editor, EL MUNDO Nine prison guards badly beat W of the inmates of the island penitentiary who escaped en masse on Oct. 28 last, when they returned to the prison again. Of these S9 there are ten who cannot even move because of the blows received, according to the reports received by the Attorney General, Vicente Gélgel Polanco, after the corresponding investigation. The Chief of Justice accepted yesterday, to take immediate effect, the resignation of Felix R. Rivera, as Mayor of the Presidio Insular, who expects to receive the benefits of retirement. The guards used feet, fists, batons, whips, blackjacks and other weapons to assault the inmates in the head, chest, back and other parts of the body, Preliminary Report The preliminary report submitted to the Attorney General by supervisors Conrad Caney and Roberto F. Todd, reveals that the condition of many of the 59 inmates "savagely" beaten by the prison guards is "truly serious." . The facts denounced to the guards Alborto Curet, Andres Toledo, Pedro Juan Rodriguez Fortlor, Jose Dolores Gonzalez, Faustino Espinosa, Nicolas La Salle, Victor. Hernández Class, Justino Alicea and Ernesto Vázquez. Six of them were transferred to the San Juan District Jail, as a provisional measure, while other aspects of the case are investigated. The Attorney General visited 10 of the 59 beaten at the Presidio hospital. Their condition was such, according to the Attorney General, that they could not even move in their beds. (Continued on Page 18, Col. 8) Seven Other Puerto Rican Casualties The Army Public Relations Office yesterday released the names of other Puerto Rican casualties in the Korean War. The following Puerto Rican soldiers from the 65th Infantry Regiment were killed in action: Sgt. 1st Class Juan A. Perez, Company F, on November 7. His widow Carmen Luz Perez resides at 51 del Cristo Street, San Juan. Sergeant Adolfo Navarro, of Company F, on November 9. He was the son of Mrs. Francisca Navarro, resident of 54 Evaristo Vazquez St., Cayey. Corporal Miguel A. Cintrón, on the 7th (Continued on Page 18, Col. 2)
Sb Expects Resignations In Island Government
By S. Gálvoz Maturo, Editor of EL MUNDO Indications that very soon there will be several resignations of important officials of the Insular Government were revealed yesterday by reliable sources. The development of several investigations on different angles related to the last subversive events in Puerto Rico, has channeled them to several officials who in a direct or indirect way have been connected to these activities. It was also revealed, although with the utmost reserve as to the persons involved, that funds from the Direct Aid to the Needy Program have been favoring subversive elements in seventeen towns in the island. I also assured that a high-ranking island official will be summoned to La Fortaleza to suggest the advisability of his resignation due to the development of recent events. V / Filé Exonerated Detective Feo. Quiñones Pleaded His Statement In The Bolita Case Does Not Constitute Perjury Following the Initrucelonea of Judge Rodolfo Ramirez Pabón, the jury hearing the case against Detective Federico Qulftonea Padró poV an aupueito crime of perjury, rendered an abaolutorlo verdict yesterday morning. The inatruction to the jury to render the verdict was given by Judge Ramírez Pabón, after considering a plea of law raised by the defendant's attorney, Carloa H. Jullá, alleging that the facts that were charged to Detective Quiñones Padró did not constitute a perjury offense. The accusation against Quiñones Padró was formulated as a result of a trial held last June in the San Juan Section of the District Court of Puerto Rico against José Soto Zaragoza and Harry Lake Penn, for a crime of violation of the Bolita Law, a case in which the exonerated detective appeared as a prosecution witness with sergeant Luis V. Costa and agent Modesto Castro. Costa and Officer Modesto Castro. Alleged Variation Alleged the prosecutor Mieras Callmano quo Quiñones Padró, in the course of the trial against Soto Zaragoza and Lake Penn spoke varied the testimony given before him (Continued on P. 18, Col 1)
Legislature To Convene In December
Muñoz Would Only Agree To Advance Vote If Majority Requests It By Juan Martines Chapel EL MUNDO Staff Writer In December, the Legislature will be convened by the Governor for a new extraordinary session. The call for the current session being held will be extended. The Governor has stated that he has no personal interest in whether or not the dates for the votes determined by the Referendum Law are moved forward. Muñoz Marin said that if the Senate asked him to extend the call so that the necessary funds could be allocated for the expenses of the commission investigating the government officials and employees, he would agree to the request because "if the investigation is to continue, expenses would have to be incurred and the necessary funds should be made available to them. The Senate the day before yesterday requested an appropriation of 85,000 for such purposes. Regarding the request of several members of the Legislature to authorize amendments to the Referendum Law to advance the date of the votes, the Governor said he would have no objection to extend the call in that sense, as long as a majority of the members of the Legislature have agreed on that point. He added that anticipating one or two votes would not justify wasting a lot of time in discussions that would delay other, more urgent and necessary legislation. The Governor has resolved to submit to the Legislature, before the last day of December, two important matters which are: amendments to the Sugar Law of 1942 and the increase of appropriations for (Continued on Page 18, Col. 5) PI Commissaries Plan to be Studied The Police Commission of the House of Representatives has been entrusted with the study of a plan for the establishment of a system of commissaries for the use of the members of the Police. Insular. The system to be implemented will be similar to the one that works in the U.S. Armed Forces, according to the motion filed yesterday in the House by Rep. Francisco Diaz Marchand. The motion requires legislation to be submitted to the next regular session of the legislative body. In the session held by the House yesterday morning, Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa, seconded a motion by Rep. Augusto Valentín Vizca(Continued on Page 13, Col. 5)
Large 'Tow Truck' Separates 'Plugged In' Cars After Train Crash
- Jb tea. ' I m a ■ 1 1a* I VW UrilMMEk a < BSMBHSf ■ Ihk<9 I Wf&JJ Fw HHmhBlJ..' ......
The photograph shows the car of the other side that was on the right side of the train (on the right is what was left of the first car of the second train). In the last photograph, we see when at the right hand side of the train, a group of onlookers watches as the train is being driven by the train.
A group of onlookers watches as powerful cranes separate two of the cars that were left plugged in when a moving train collided with another that was parked in front of a safety sphalt in the K
eion, in the Kew Gardena section of Queens County, New York. In the center is a group of rescue patrol workers searching through the debris. At the left of the photo, they were trying to separate the
At the left of the photo, they were trying to separate with powerful cranes the cars that were in the vicinity of each other. The downbound car was the first of the oncoming train. (Associated Press photos.)
Boricua Heroism Sgt. Aymat Recounts Risks Took by Troops From '65
José Efraín Aymat, a native of Guánlca, whose wife and children reside in Puerto Nuevo, gives a vivid account of his experiences in Korea as a member of Company "G" of the 65th Infantry Regiment. José Efrain Aymat, of Company G of the 85th Infantry, gives a vivid account of the landing of the Puerto Rican Regiment at the port of Wonsan in Korea, on November 5, and explains in detail the experiences lived during the following days by the Puerto Rican soldiers, in the fulfillment of the difficult mission that has been entrusted to them in Korea.
- The Senate Special Committee investigating the participation of government employees in possible subversive activities began its work yesterday. The Senate was the first branch* of the Government to which questionnaires were sent to be filled out by all its employees, requiring information on age, place of birth, position held, annual salary earned, political affiliation and other details. The Commission has requested an appropriation of 85,000 to enable it to carry out its work, and it is expected that the Governor will amend the call of the current special session to include legislation to that effect. (Continued on p. 18, Col. 4)
commended. i It was brought from a most interesting account, in which Sergeant Aymat describes the dangers to which the Puerto Rican soldiers have been continually exposed and the tactics resorted to by the enemy in a vain attempt to stop the victorious advance of the United Nations troops. Sergeant Aymat, a native of Guanlca and father of three children born of his marriage to Mrs. Olga Chacon de Aymat, a resident of Block FG-55 of Puerto Nuevo, begins his account by saying the following: Duermen Bejo Los Pinos "We left Pusan by boat on the 5th, at five in the afternoon, arriving at Wonsan at six in the afternoon of the following day, AHI, as there is no dock, since they destroyed it with bombs, we had to disembark in boats that took us to the beach. "We walked on foot with all the equipment to a place where a convoy of trucks was waiting for us. They took us out of the town of Wonsan, which is, by the way, the best presented town we have ever seen, with its streets and a playground and two and three-story buildings and nice houses. "We were dropped off on the outskirts of town and under some pine trees we went to sleep. It was already two o'clock (Continued on P. 18, Col. 6)
End is to End War Before Christmas
Troops Take Key Positions MacArthur Flew Along Chinese Border. Aircraft Annihilate Rear Guard By RUTHEFORD M. POATS TOKYO, Saturday, November 28 - American guns roared off Chinese Communist positions today daring them to come forward for the first major battle of General Douglas MacArthur's offensive to end the war. Approximately one hundred thousand United Nations troops advanced unopposed, advancing about fifteen miles on an 85-mile front. The Jos advance put them in position to fight Communist forces of equal magnitude. Throughout the night, U.S. and other U.N. troops, trucks and tanks advanced at full steam toward the battle positions. The United Nations forces consolidated the initial leap over the wide strip of no man's land, and prepared for the imminent assault, preluded by the roar of cannon fire, MacArthur, who flew to the war zone to give the order to go ahead, told your field commander that he wanted to liquidate the war before Christmas. Then, in a bold gesture of defiance to the Chinese Communists, the Supreme Commander flew over the Manchurian border, sighting many miles of Chinese territory. MacArthur's offensive was aimed at challenging Communist China to openly commit its stubborn armies, estimated at 400 to 600,0001 troops, to the other side of the Yalu awaiting orders from Peking, or to force it to withdraw its troops from Korea. Although there was no battle of note on the first day of the offensive, the Allies gained key bases from which to launch the assault aimed at driving the enemy out of Korea. The U.S. Fourteenth Army placed a combat force at Chongju, an important transportation and road hub on the Northeast coast. There, the Stevens* combat force was engaged in marking time, awaiting the arrival of the units on the flanks. It was by this same road that the Vlgésimocuarta was placed in the vicinity of the border, about a month ago. Attack on Unsan The U.S. Vlg Fifteenth* launched its main fighting force against Unsan, scene of the great American defeat on November 1 at the hands of Chinese cavalrymen.) The veteran South Korean 1st occupied trenches on the east bank of the Taeryong River, opposite Tao.