TOMORROW'S DAILY FORECAST
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, TODAY: - Medium cloudy with scattered showers. IN SAN JUAN, ♦* YESTERDAY: High temp. 84 degrees; minimum, 75 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:80 o'clock this afternoon, 29.91 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, June 9 (PU). - The following temperatures were reported this afternoon: New York, New York. M; Chicago, 81; Washington, 97; Miami, 85. Predictions for* tomorrow in New York and neighboring cities: hot and more humid with scattered showers or thunderstorms*. Highest temperature between 89 and 8* on the coast and between 85 and 90 in the inland sections.
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION
YEAR XXXI
Entered as second class matter, Post Office, San Juan, P. A
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY JUNE 10, 1950
NUMBER 14045 FIVE CENTAVOS
Reading of Palou's Sentences Postponed Until Friday
I f $ 12 WWtaír' //A W ® ■HT a £9 / / A /ai " -r77 -/f' 1 f w V - A" -A ' la 'i v Jr Ib / ■ i i i > -* ■ Y* á j m
F4 Lic. César Andréu Ribas, defense attorney for Miguel Angel Palou (right) asks the Court to be lenient with the convict. The Court agreed to
agreed to suspend the reading of the sentence until next Friday to give the defense an opportunity to present evidence of mitigation*. x
Committee Publishes Report On Constitution Says E*U Would Complete Measure To Complete Local Home Rule Inula By WnXIAM DORVTLLIER WASHINGTON, June 9, (Special to THE WORLD)-The Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee yesterday released its report to the Senate urging approval of the bill to allow the Puerto Rican people to adopt their own Constitution "as a logical step in the process of political freedom and economic advancement." The purpose of the bill, the Report said, is to allow the people to organize their own government, "by holding a Constitutional Convention and adopting a Constitution that will be submitted to Congress for approval". It added that the bill is "by way of a compact, with the specific provision of an insular referendum, in which Puerto Ricans will be free to express their voice of acceptance or repudiation of the bill." It is intended to "complete the full measure of local self-government on the Island" by having citizens express their feelings and be able to "create their own territorial government," the report said. "The President and Congress will be the judges of whether the rights of the people are fully protected" in the adoption of the constitution, the report said, adding: "It is a logical step in the process of political freedom and economic development that began in the days of our military occupation of the island at the end of the last century. The draft constitution is another step in the people's course to full self-government," it said, the most recent of which "was the right to elect the Governor, which has had a very dynamic effect on the people of Puerto Rico," Governor Luis Muñoz Marín, the Report said, "has the support of the great majority of the people in his important program for industrialization and economic development. The report continued: "The history of the relationship between Puerto Rico and the United States is an eloquent testimony to the fact that we have secured political progress and developed self-government on the Island. It is a record of which every American should be proud. It is not suggested that a bill such as S. P. 3.336 is necessary to fulfill our obligations to Puerto Rico under the United Nations Charter. Those obligations have already been met, to an extent that is almost without parallel". The provision of the U.N. Charter, which mandates ,'Continued on page 18. Col. 8)
lou Marquez, convicted of eight counts of murder in the first degree and two counts of encouraging life. The magistrate agreed to postpone the reading of the sentences to give Palou's attorneys an opportunity to offer evidence of mitigating factors. Concurrent Sentences The mitigating evidence is aimed at convincing the judge that he should issue concurrent sentences against Palou, as he did in the cases against Miguel Cirilo Batalla. The debate on the motion to postpone the reading of the sentences was initiated by Andréu Ribas, who argued that Palou had defended himself against the accusations made against him by exercising a right that the law gave him, and that his plea of innocence could not mean that the court would punish him more severely than if he had pleaded guilty. Andréu Ribas further announced to the court that notwithstanding the sentences imposed on Palou, he intended to appeal to the Supreme Court to discuss again the questions of law that had arisen during the trial. While arguing his motion, Andréu Ribas referred to the prejudices of "a certain press that has even tried to influence the judge before sentencing in this case. In making the foregoing statements, Mr. Andréu Ribas showed the judge the editorial of yesterday's newspaper. The drowned man asked the court what reason there could be for "Batalla, a Cuban, to be punished less severely than Palou, who is Puerto Rican". To Protect Jilea Andréu Ribas added that he wanted to offer proof of mitigating factors to protect Judge Suárez Garriga from "unjust attacks, because he has already begun to be censured for having said that this lawyer defended Palou with loyalty and with all the resources he could. Despite the opposition of prosecutor Viera Martinez, the judge said he agreed to postpone the reading of the sentences "because the court does not intend to issue concurrent sentences". Referring to the attacks that Andréu Ribas said the judge had already made against him. Suarez Garriga stated that he knew what the lawyer was referring to and added that he reiterated his opinion that the lawyer had defended Palou "as no other lawyer would have done, or continued on page 18, Col. 8).
Bingo Gambling At Unauthorized Sites To Be Pursued
The Department of Justice will prosecute churches, lodges and social centers that operate bingo games outside the law, according to a report yesterday. The Attorney General, Vicente Géigel Polanco, addressed the owners, administrators and directors of such centers, to instruct them on the matter. He informed that he had warned them that, as of yesterday, "they would discontinue the celebration of bingo games, "because they are prohibited by the legislation in force". In his letter to that effect, the Attorney General added that "since the Legislative Assembly was considering legislation to legalize these games under certain conditions, the Department of Justice decided to
not to initiate any proceedings against violators of the law, pending legislative action. 834,000 License In a recent session, the Houses approved a bill, which was signed by the Governor, authorizing gambling in lodges and churches which have been established for ten years and hold it in their own premises once a week, provided they are provided with a license to be issued by the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico. The Attorney General said that he has requested the cooperation of the perennials to whom he has addressed and that he expects to receive it from them as well as from all those who are interested in the celebration of the event (continued on page 17, Col. 8).
They Will Make Effort So That Judge Imposes Concurrent Sentences Defense Proposes to Offer Mitigating Evidence - There Was Debate Between Lawyers and Viera Martines, By J. M. García Calderón Editor of EL MUNDO After a "heated debate between attorneys César Andréu Ribas and Santos P. Amadeo and prosecutor Angel Viera Martínez, Judge Ju' lio Suárez Gnrrlga agreed yesterday to postpone until next Friday & 9:00 a.m. the reading of the sentences against Miguel Angel Pa-
Pons Reforms Services Public Health Warns Doctors Must Dedicate Full Time to Work By LUTS HERNANDEZ AQUINO EL MUNDO Staff Writer Doctors of the Department of Health who occupy full-time positions will be obliged, as of July 1, to dedicate themselves to their official work, and may not engage in the private practice of medicine, nor in any commercial activity incompatible with the exercise of the position. The Commissioner of Health, Dr. Juan A. Pone, has informed the doctors of the department that (Continued on page 18, Col. 1J Thefts For $25,000
By Luis Sdtichos Csopt Editor of THE WORLD The Post Office Inspector, Mr. Harry Stolberg, disclosed yesterday that he had discovered a series of sensational thefts of merchandise to the value of more than $25,000 perpetrated on the railroad since a year ago. The thefts, allegedly carried out by a combination of three employees of the railroad company and a third person - all of whom were arrested yesterday - were discovered as a result of a tip received by Mr. Stolberg from an unidentified and unnamed person who will be rewarded. Mr. Stolberg reported yesterday that he had had reports for some time that parcels were constantly being lost from the United States, shipped to various points on the Tala by railroad, consigned to various merchants. Shoulder Clothing Most of the postal packages, arriving in the United States mail on Monday and dispatched to their consignees on the Island on Tuesday, contain men's clothing, handbags, belts, belts, etc. A few days ago, Mr. Stolberg received a tip from an unidentified person, to the effect that the Dodge car, license 8756, was seen Tuesday in the jurisdiction of Vega Baja, near Camp Tortuguero, taking packages at a place near the railroad track. After the investigation was initiated by Mr. Stolberg,
Sierra Makes Explanation Of Contracts Exposes Performance Of Department Says Labor Cannot Dictate To Northern Firms What Lines They Must Use By Panel CHARLESTON, June 9.-(PU>- Puerto Rico Labor Commissioner Fernando Sierra Berdecla declared today that his Department cannot dictate to mainland farmers what air lines they must use in the transfer of farm laborers. Therefore, he said, he had no role in the signing of the contract between the farmers and Westair Airlines, one of whose planes fell into the sea last Monday, possibly killing 97 Puerto Rican workers. He stated that the Department's only function is to find out if the lines that plan to hire farmers meet the safety conditions required by law. Sierra Berdecla explained how they sign the contracts in an interview with Prenaa Unida, which asked him why he chose Westair to transfer the workers. The Commissioner replied: "Under Puerto Rico law, the Labor Commissioner must approve any contract made between employers residing outside Puerto Rico and workers residing in Puerto Rico to work outside the island. The contract under which more than 4,000 workers worked last year in the northeastern United States and signed on behalf of the farmers by Garden States Associates (a farmer cooperative) was approved by me. "Among other terms of employment," added Sierra Berdecla. "Last year's contract, like those of previous years and this year's, fixed the amount of money the workers must pay through deductions from their wages for their p*This amount of money seemed excessive to us. We wrote to various fixed-route and non-fixed-route companies asking for offers which we would then pass on, as we did. to the farmers' representatives. PAWA offer Pan American World Airways made a $57.50 offer. Eastern Airlines said they could not bid. We indicated to Garden States that we would not approve the ticket price to be set in the contract with the workers if it exceeded $57.50. We arranged for Garden States representatives to meet with Pan American representatives. The Garden States representatives* informed us (continued on page 17, col. 6)
4 Charged With Stealing Parcels From Railroad For 1 Year
with the cooperation of Detective Rubén A. Horta, Sergio Cruz Carrasquillo, Pedro Núñez and Sgt. Antonio Capablanca, found out that the package was the property of Frank Acevedo, a Vega Baja real estate dealer. Acevedo was questioned and before Mr. Stolberg he gave a statement confessing that since last year he has had a business deal with Juan Figueroa, Francisco Lopez Crux and Gerardo Fernandez, railroad employees for more than 8 years. The business consisted in that Figueroa, Lopez Cruz and Fernandez, traveling in the train in which the merchandise was sent weekly to the Island, would scam several packages out of the car at an agreed place near the Tortuguero Camp. This was done at night, in desolate parts of that jurisdiction, one of them identified by Mr. Stolberg as Ojo de Agua. By virtue of the agreement, the aforementioned employees threw only postal packages containing soca, special merchandise to the agreed site. The agreement was signed by Northcool and Arrow men's clothing. The merchandise was then picked up by Acevedo in his car, and taken to his car on Borinquen Avenue at BarHo Obrero. There, he would stick to Figueroa, López Cruz and Fernández, at the rate of one dollar for each pair of pants of the aforementioned brand, and 30 centevoa for each shirt. Continued on page 17, Col. 8).
Workers Expedite Shipment; Coffee Shortage Was False
TA Employee Alleges No Inspection Based on Pizarro's Statement, Concepcion Calls for Hollohan's Impeachment
Congressmen Find Hike Unjustified Call for Prosecution of Speculators and Put Drano Under Federal Law By EllMb0th~WHARTON WASHINGTON, June 9 (PU) - The Senate Glllete Subcommittee today ended its investigation of the spike in coffee prices, calling on the Department of Justice to prosecute speculators and for coffee transactions to be governed by the Agricultural Commodity Exchange Act. The Subcommittee, headed by Senator Guy M. Glllete, D-Lowa, initiated an extensive investigation last December, when alleged coffee shortages drove up prices rapidly, prompting millions of complaints from housewives. In its report today, the Subcomlté said that it had never explained the alleged coffee shortage and that the price increase was therefore unjustified. It blamed speculators for the increase, but also called for the "immediate" distribution of stocks controlled in this country by foreign interests. He submitted 19 recommendations, among them that the Government "carefully investigate" any new loans to coffee producing countries in Latin America. It further said that transactions in coffee should come under the Agricultural Commodity Exchange Act, and that the profits of foreign interests speculating on U.S. commodity exchanges be subject to taxation. The Subcommittee asked the Department of Justice to take three specific actions: 1. To investigate coffee purchases made in Brazil in 1948 by George V. Robbins, of the Max Maxwell Division of the Maxwell Division of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and 2. Robbins, of the Maxwell House Division of the General Foods Corporation, to determine "whether any federal law was violated". He said that Robbins "misled" the Committee and "could have been cited for contempt," but that the process would have delayed the Investigation. That Intel* a civil suit under the Anti-Monopoly Act to compel the Federación Nacional de Coaecheroa de Café de Colombia and other foreign Intereaeaea to diatribe coffee exports in this pala, unless aal'Contlnued on page 17, Col. 5)
Invoking "legacy" irregularities denounced by an employee of the Transportation Authority's Aviation Division, Dr. Gilberto Concepcion de Grada, president of the Independentista Party, seeks the dismissal of Eddie Hollohan, head of the aforementioned Division, on the grounds that he was seriously negligent in ordering the completion of safety procedures after the Weatair airliner disaster in Florida. Dr. Concepcion de Gracia's complaint is based on an affidavit sworn by the employee of the Transportation Authority, Mr. Lula Pizarro. This affidavit was sworn before notary Héctor R "moa Mimoso. En ésta expreaa que el Impreso de Inspección de seguridad habla sido llenado por orden del señor Hollohan después que habla caldo el avión "iniea,'Contlnúa en la página 17, Col. 1) Voluelve a la Isla El Periodista Nieves Rivera Cubrió Como Redactor De EL MUNDO el Arribo Náufrago* a Charleston Ayer a laa 2:30 P. M. at 2:30 P.M., the special envoy from Miami, from where he departed at 8:30 A.M., arrived at our newsroom. M" the special envoy of" EL MUNDO to the area of the Florida air disaster, our colleague Carlos Nieves Rivera. Nieves Rivera, who arrived in Mia. mi in the early hours of the morning from Charleston, South Carolina, was covering for this newspaper the information of the disaster in which 27 Puerto Rican workers lost their lives on their way to work in the agricultural fields of Saginaw, Michigan. He was accompanied on the trip by the graphic re. dactor of EL MUNDO, Luí" de Casenave, who returned on 1* Thursday afternoon with exclusive graphics* taken at the same place of 1* tragedy. Comrade Nieves Rivera has material for an extensive repor'Continued on page 17, Col. 5).
Dr. Gilberto Concepción de Gracia Expects Collections Of $84,800,000 From Taxes - Descartes Believes Estimate Will Be Covered By June 30 The Treasurer of Puerto Rico is of the opinion that the new estimate of the island government's income for the fiscal year ending June 30 will be covered. This was stated by Mr. Deacartes "1 during a press conference held at his Treasury Department offices. The Treasurer said the figures corresponding to the original estimate for the fiscal year, which had to be revised recently, will be covered. The original estimate, according to Treasurer Descartes, was $79,800,000, which was revised last May 5 to $84,800,000. Among the determining factors for the revision of the calculation in the manner referred to, is, according to the Treasurer, the income tax, which is noted first or on page 17, Col. 7).
■ Hr "li ■"■ ■ ■- I v Tro - h.w í-_ a! , K t - i ■ sil He " . "Yes?.x- WgsB t "WlF I \ si . I v iww - Above appear, from Isqulerda to right, Franeleno Ponea. Below is a large part of the spoils of Lopes Cnu. Frank Acevedo and Juan Figueroa, tree ataga ta4 stolen by In* accused" during the tede lo* four accused* of stealing merchandise dnl last mana, (Fot®, rl MUNDO). tara eomo qua haca al recorrido do Boa Juan a
Urgently Needed In Michigan Oawford Says Beet Coñeeha In Danger. The transfer of workers to Michigan continued as usual yesterday on Pan American World Airways and Eastern Air Lines planes, while negotiations continued between Michigan Crops and the airlines to agree on a permanent contract. At a meeting held yesterday between representatives of Eastern Airline, Pan American Airways, the Michigan Field Crops and the Island government, a plan was agreed upon to continue the agricultural worker train to Saginaw, Michigan, using certified airliners. According to breaking information given last night to EL MUNDO by telephone by Colonel Arri. Itera, military aide to the Governor, the tranaportsclón of the 4 000 nhrema reatantes ae effected comaniando from today. in vnaloa direct* h "sta Saginaw. MIchlgan. Today aáhade te EAL will make two flights* and I* PAA another* two*. Tomorrow* Sunday EAL will make two flights* and I* PAA dnrn. From Sunday forward, Eastern will fly twice daily and American will fly twice daily. The cost of the ticket will be M0 per person, Michigan Field Crops, the company which hired * |n* the laborer, having agreed to pay M5. The laborer will have to pay M0, to the extent of the 800. All indications are that the transfer of laborers will be intensified from next week, it was disclosed yesterday, as the farming firm has reported 1* urgency 'that the laborers be ready to perform the farm work for which they are being hired. About 500 laborers will leave daily from next week at the request of the Michigan Filed Crops. As of yesterday, a total of 1,714 workers had left the Continent as part of the migration project. The Michigan Fields Crop* intends to take a total of 5,000 and perhaps more, if necessary. Last night another Eastern plane left at 10:30 for Tri-State. Michigan carrying on board 62 braceros. Yesterday morning a PAWA plane left for Saginaw, Michigan, with another group of 55, and another two Eastern planes were scheduled to leave yesterday afternoon with groups of 62 workers. The transportation of the workers was being carried out yesterday with the use of planes from both airlines, pending the final contract between the Michigan Field Crops and either or both of them. The fare is $90. of which the farmers' com. paftta is $25 of the difference in the $55 fare charged by Westair, I while each laborer will pay an additional $10. Meanwhile, in the offices of the Bureau of Employment and Migration, headed by Mrs. Petro America Pagan de Colon, yesterday, the groups of workers summoned to finalize the details of the signing of the labor contract and the trip continued to be processed. As soon as the groups of workers leave the Negc. offices with their signed contracts," the Michigan Fileda Crop" toContinued on page 17, Col. 4) MORE PHOTOGRAPHS ON PAGE 7 A new collection of photographs" about the "survivor* of the C-49 plane that crashed Monday night in the Atlantic, killing 27 Puerto Ricans*, appears on page "late" of this issue. They were taken* by L our comrade Lula de ' Caaenave. sent ¡ mint to Charleston to cu- I I hrir by THE WORLD the and. bo of lo* compatriot* on board the destroyer SauHey, after *u rescue from the water". Casenave arrived in Puer- I] to Rico on Thursday" late, i and per rasone* of time and ■ espado could not publish* complete all the material I graphic he brought. Today we give it to our readers as a complement to the one we have exclusively published in past edlctane" about the unfortunate event.