THE MONDO
WEATHER FORECASTS FOR THE ISLAND, ROY: Generally partly cloudy with scattered showers. IN BAN JUAN, YESTERDAY: High temp. M degrees: low, 78 degrees. Barometric pressure at sea level, at 4:88 p.m., 80.01 inches of mercury.
NEW YORK, hand 19. (PU) - Bn today's taris so infennarai the sigiilsatoB tenperawra: Nmvs York Mi Chicago, 41i Washington, 97| Miami, 79. Proclcclnnee for tomorrow as New York and neighboring eludadeo: moderate F mée drapey, eon the temperature mée high between 48 and ". VldhW* nMriBVllKBUW piVUtRIKlWI (MH XN9JT* west.
MORNING
THE MORNING
THE FIRST AND ONLY NEWSPAPER IN PUERTO RICO WITH ABC-CERTIFIED CIRCULATION.
YEAR XXX
1 as second class matter, Office, flan Juan, F. R.
Entered Post (
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO - SATURDAY, MARCH 11, 1950
NUMBER 13956
FIVE CENT
AFF Raises Rural Area Problem
Needs Grant From Lucchetti Explains Plan For Neighborhoods Will Require $2,500,000 Contribution r®" burioo i, rivera Reactor da EL MUNDO . -Puerto Rico's rural electrification is a cyclopean work of great social value, but its development is subject to the help that Jos. taxpayers can contribute, since it is an undertaking that requires a subsidy to be carried out in its entirety. In such terms was expressed by senior Antonio Lucchetti, executive director of the Water Resources Authority, when this editor asked him about the Jala's rural electrification program. "The construction of extensions in rural areas," he says, "is something that is very expensive; it is not self-fundable, it cannot be produced, and it has to be done on a subsidy basis with the help of the contributors. Mr. Lucchetti adds that "the Water Resources Authority is taking a great rosponaablllllity in taking over the cost of the operation of this system. This program is limited to the funds available for its implementation. This year only 1300,000 has been recommended; previously it spoke of an allocation of 9400,000." "River Sources," Mr. Lucchetti continued, "since it made the recommendations to initiate the construction of lines in the rural area, which was done with the help of the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration in 1938, has always maintained a vigorous struggle to speed up the expansion of the electric system so that as soon as possible electricity can be supplied to all the inhabitants of Puerto Rico in whatever part of the country they may be, including the rural area. Explained my advance the sophor Lucchetti that "in the realization of this proposal, it has always encountered the lack of funds to attack it properly. "However, when the opportunity has presented itself, Fuentes Fluviales has taken advantage of it and the progress it has made so far is the maximum progress that has allowed the advancement of Puerto Rico's economy". He points out advantages However, despite the difficulty in developing the rural electrification program on the island, Mr. Lucchetti points out some of the advantages of the program. He says: "Everything that is fought for in the world, progress, satisfaction and tranquility in the soul, is a principle of political economy. It produces a very salutary effect on people. It fosters the spirit of association." "The above philosophical principle is achieved," as Mr. Lucchetti let it be understood, "through the facilities that man has in enjoying a full service of occlusion. "On the other hand, and in a more or less general sense, the rural electrification program compensates somewhat for the subsidy that may be allocated for its implementation, "At present, for every dollar obtained from the sale of electric energy in the rural area, only one cent goes to the municipality where it is sold. Another five cents goes into the Island Treasury. "In such form and manner, it could be said that for every 9100,000 that is allocated for this program, about fifteen to twenty thousand dollars would be obtained from the sale of energy and of that amount, one thousand dollars would return to the Island Treasury. It is therefore an investment that yields the Government a 3-1J2 percent profit. Program Completed The rural oil projects completed in the first year of the program, corresponding to fiscal year 1949-47, cost approximately $9,400,839.54. A total of 717,714 primary and secondary lines were extended to serve some 8,118 subscribers. For the second year of the program, 1847-48, 9401,834.40 was spent on 780,138 feet of primary and secondary lines serving 3,903 subscribers. The third phase, 1948*49, cost 8401,888.89; 747,893 feet of primary and secondary lines serving 9,748 subscribers. In all, 81,849.90 was spent on the three major parts of the program, for some 3,315,773 feet of primary and secondary lines serving some 8,785 subscribers of the River Basin Authority. Fourth Program Program The final report that the A. F. F. F. on the rural electrification program states the following in connection with the program to be carried out for the fourth year of the general program 1949-50 and for the fourth year 1950-51. The report states: "A total of 33 projects, amounting to the estimated amount of $8,400,318.87, were approved for execution during the fourth year of the program and for the fourth year of the general program 1949-50.
Little Jeannie Examines Her Schedule
Little Jeannie Caruso, age two, examines her income tax return, apparently satisfied with the $840 she earned as a movie actor. She acted for three months in front of the cameras and then collected 825 in unemployment insurance for 28 weeks. Jeannie appeared as Madame Bovary's daughter in the film of the same name. (Associated Press Photo) University Anniversary Celebration Today Events will extend through tomorrow afternoon. Program on Campus Today will begin the celebration of the eighteenth anniversary of the founding of the University of Puerto Rico, extending the events until tomorrow afternoon at five o'clock. Tonight, in the open air, will take place on the campus of the University a concert of the Sinfonista, and the Trio Los Universitarios par-' tleIparé with some numbers, There will also be colorful fireworks. On the occasion of tonight's celebration, the Tower has been illuminated and two dates marking the life of our first teaching institute, 1903, the date of its foundation, and 1950, have been installed on both sides of the Tower in giant size. Tomorrow, the UPR Alumni Association will hold its general assembly tomorrow. From 8:00 to 9:30 a.m. the alumni will visit the different university facilities: libraries, museums, laboratories, exhibition of paintings, etc. At 9:45 a.m., in the Theater, there will be a concert by the UPR Choir, under the direction of Mr. Augusto Rodríguez. The Choir will perform the following pieces: Jerusalem Surge, Momento Musical, Por un Amor, Laura y Georgina, and Alma Mater, hymn of the University. As the second part of the program, the University Ballet, which is directed by Mrs. Horta Brauer, will present the following numbers: Tres proludios, Vals Triste, Gran Nocturno del Sueño do una Noche de Verano, la Ninf Enamorada and Las Sílfidos. Alumni Assembly During the afternoon, beginning at two o'clock, I will hold the general assembly of the UPR alumni, under the presidency of Mr. Carlos J. Torres, and I will proceed to the consideration and discussion of the Report of the Regulations Committee. They will also exchange impressions on the celebration of the Cln(Continued on page 18, col. 7)
Hundreds of Students Use Contaminated Water in Moca
Some 380 students in the Cuchillas neighborhood of Moca are drinking contaminated water from a spring well, according to official certification from the Public Health Department. Many are already sick to their stomachs. The Association of Parents and Teachers of the locality has addressed the Commissioner of Instruction, Mariano Villaronga, to inform him about the matter and to point out the serious risk to the health of the community in general. The complainants allege that the only source of water for school children is the spring well, whose water is contaminated, according to medical certification. An official from the Public Health Department in Moca took samples of the water, which were analyzed in Aguadilla. Officer Julio Alvaros and Dr. A. Pintado authorized a sample of the water, which was analyzed in Aguadilla.
tlflcado in possession of the plaintiffs, stating that the referred waters are contaminated. Health Threatened Cuchillas schools are attended daily by 350 children. Two additional classrooms are being built, which will accommodate an additional 100 children. Moca parents allege that drinking such water "seriously threatens the health" of their children and that it "could cause the spread of any disease to their children, and perhaps cause deaths". In fact, they report, numerous children have revealed a strange stomach ailment, "thus causing uneasiness among teachers and parents. The complainants suggest that a cistern be built to supply rainwater, and to this end, they suggest - (Continued on Page 16-Col. 3)
Senate Passes $18,000,000,000 Appropriation
- Approved Bond Issue for Construction of a New Industrial Commission Building. - Passed Bond Bill An eighteen million dollar bond issue for the People of Puerto Rico was approved yesterday by the Senate. On third reading, House Bill 457 was approved, which authorizes said issuance to cover the cost of necessary public improvements, and provides for the payment of principal and interest on said bonds. The proceeds of said bonds shall be devoted to the public works and improvements listed below, and in the amount indicated, with respect to each of said improvements, or shall be devoted in such amounts as the Legislature may from time to time determine for said works and improvements: Construction and improvements to highways, roads and bridges, 94,435,089.80; construction of hospital facilities and Public Health centers 94,134,368.99; construction of school facilities, including funds for vocational schools, 92,084,012.15; public works for government agencies, 92,487,531.58; construction and improvements to airports, seaports and maritime transportation, $3,589,500; rural aqueducts, 9300,000; program for low-cost homes and housing developments, 9L009,500.00. New Building Also approved on third reading was Senate Bill 95, providing for the construction of a building for the use of the Industrial Commission; authorizing and directing the Commissioner of the Interior to construct said building on the grounds of El Pueblo de Puerto Rico, adjacent to the building occupied by the American Red Cross, Puerto Rico Chapter; and to provide for the manner in which said building shall be financed. Senate Bill 100, to order the Auditor and the Treasurer of Puerto Rico to transfer to the Transportation Authority for its income in the Operating Funds, the sum of fifteen thousand four hundred sixty-eight dollars, from the allocation of one million seven hundred fifty thousand dollars of Act 8 of 1947, for the construction of airports, was also approved on third reading. Speaker Celestino Irlarte opposed the approval of this bill, considering that it would legalize an irregularity allowed by the Auditor of Puerto Rico, by approving that the Transportation Authority use an amount of money from its operating funds for the purchase of land, in order to exchange it with other land belonging to the Navy, an operation contrary to the provisions of the Law. Discretion in Bonds Senate Bills 101, 103 and 103 were approved to amend the Act providing for the provision of official bonds by the clerks and marshals of the Municipal Courts, leaving the setting of such bonds to the discretion of the Treasurer of Puerto Rico, with the approval of the Auditor. These bills were also approved on third reading, Authorization to the Attorney General Senate Bill 104, authorizing the Attorney General of Puerto Rico to appoint attorneys of the Department of Labor in certain cases, without any expenditure by the Government of Puerto Rico, was approved on third reading. Finally, bills 83 and 83 to authorize Mrs. Providencia Irizarry and L. M. Rundtett to file a civil action against the People of Puerto Rico were also approved on third reading. Bills Considered Before adjourning until 4:00 p.m. next Monday, the Senate considered the following bills: P. del S. 311.- "Appropriating the sum of four thousand (4,000) dollars to defray the expenses incurred in the (Continued on Pg. 18-Col. 5)
Pinero Renders Report On Hawaii Visit Tells Muñoz Marin Boricuas Are Better Integrated Than In Ñ.y. By JamssF. Cunningham WASHINGTON, March 10 (PU)-Ox Gov. Jesus T. Uñero spent the morning on the island of Hawaii, March 10, 2010. Uñero spent the morning with Governor Luis Muñoz Marlp, giving a briefing on the ten thousand Puerto Ricans residing in the territory of Hawaii. Piflero has just returned from Honolulu, where he was Governor Muñoz Marin's personal representative at the Golden Jubilee of Puerto Rican Immigrants. In general, Piflero reported, Puerto Ricans and their descendants in Hawaii are better integrated into the community than Puerto Ricans in New York and elsewhere on the Mainland, where they make up such a large percentage of the population. The Puerto Ricans in Hawaii have their own elvea, associations and athletic clubs, but they have blended into Hawaii's cosmopolitan society, and are more aware of their American citizenship than their compatriots in Puerto Rico, and even in New York. Puerto Ricans in Hawaii, Piflero said, "have no inferiority complex about their citizenship - as is so often the case in Puerto Rico." The Puerto Ricans in Hawaii," he continued, "occasionally refer to themselves as Puerto Ricans, but their great political interest is in the statehood of Hawaii. Although they rejoice in the progress and political developments on the Island, they are too deeply rooted in the 'Paradise Pad' (Continued on page 18, Col. 8).
Editorial On Hedionda Sparks Debate In House Legislative Body Says It Has Not Yet Adopted Agreement On Its Use As Coffee Substitute An editorial by EL MUNDO sparked a debate in the session "held by the House of Representatives yesterday. Representative Luis Santaliz Capestany addressed * the House, referring to the editorial published by EL MUNDO in its yesterday's edi-
ción of yesterday, in relation to the possible use of stink as a coffee substitute. Santaliz expressed that the editorial was not in line with the agreement adopted by the Chamber and to that effect made a motion that the legislative body make a statement to the effect that it was not looking for coffee substitutes. Floor leader Benjamin Ortiz objected to the terms of the motion, citing procedural issues based mainly on the absence of the motion's author, although he expressed sympathy with the San Tolls' proposal. Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa In. tervlno stated that the editorial in EL MUNDO did not involve any malicious intent. He said that it was anti-scientific to make a pronouncement in the sense that no substitutes should be sought for coffee, since the search for substitutes has been felt as a necessity. He used medicine as an example and ended up by referring to people as the subject subject to the application of their. Figueroa said that if there is a production deficit of 100,000 tons of coffee on the island, there is nothing wrong in thinking of looking for substitutes to the grain and arguing in favor of the same, especially in the way this newspaper has done. Finally, Dr. Figueroa said that if there was any error, it might have arisen from the information originally published, and that it was feasible to rectify it, although he could not know either. (Continued on Page 16-Col. 7)
8. GALVEZ MATURANA Editor, EL MUNDO Yesterday was received at the Sonado the preliminary actuarial report on a social insurance system for drivers in Puerto Rico, prepared by Senior Robert J. Myers, acting for the Social Security Administration in Washington. Mr. Myers explains that the report is preliminary because not all questionnaires have been received and tabulations have not yet been prepared. The report is divided into four sections, corresponding to the various insurable social risks to be considered, and a final section containing general views on the central theme. Sickness According to the According to the Report, both employed and self-employed drivers will have to pay equal contributions, i.e. a fixed amount of which the employer will pay half. Both pensions and contributions must be absolute amounts and not per hundred of the wages or income. The pension may be 88.00 per week, for a maximum of ten weeks. The first payment may be made at the end of the second week of sickness (i.e. after 14 days of sickness, according to the Report). Pension will not be paid for fractions of a week (Continued on page 18, Col. 8).
Pilot Dies in Luquillo Plane Crash
Remains of the U.S. Navy plane that crashed in the vicinity of the Forest Reserve in Luquillo, The plane was part of a squadron participating in the "Porlrex" maneuvers held in Vieques. Near the
A U.S. Navy Corearlo type dolphin aircraft crashed yesterday morning in the vicinity of the Forest Reserve in Luquillo. The plane, which was participating in
the "Portrex" maneuvers, came from the aircraft carrier Franklin D. Roosevelt, anchored next to the Roosevelt Roads Naval Base. The pilot, the only occupant of the aircraft, died instantly when the plane descended.
The unidentified body of the pilot and sole occupant was found wrapped in a blanket attached to a pole by ropes. In the rescue work, the workers of the Forest Reserve took an active part.
The rescue was carried out in a fire, according to eyewitness accounts of the tragedy. Following the rules established by the naval authorities, their (Continued on Pg. 18-Col. 8)
Dr. Andres Franceschi Accused Of Violating Income Tax Law
Dr. Andres Franceschi, a well-known San Juan physician, yesterday morning posted a 93,000 cash bond at the San Juan District Court Criminal Clerk's Office, after prosecutor Guillermo A. Gil charged him with an alleged violation of the Income Tax Law. For his part, Dr. Franceschi declared that in this case, "he has been treated as a gangitor. The accusation alleges that Dr. Franceschi violated the aforementioned law by reporting in the tax return corresponding to fiscal year 1948 that his income was 934,980 when his real income was 957,537.30. It is also alleged in the indictment that Dr. Franceschi paid 9883.83 for his income for fiscal year 1948, when he should have paid 914,880. According to * Gil, the case of Dr. Franceschi is the first of its kind to be initiated in Puerto Rico against a citizen who declares income) greater than that actually obtained. "Some time ago," said prosecutor Gil RIVera. "Another case was initiated against Antonio Carboné, of Ponce, but on that occasion it was
Prosecutor Guillermo A. Gil, who filed the accusation against Dr. Andres Franceschi. who ao alleged that he doubted, not accused did not speak doctorate his Income". The infraction of 1* the Income Tax Law charged against Dr. Franceschi is punishable by maximum penalties of up to five years in prison and a fine of 810,000 pesos, or both, upon conviction (Continued on page 18, Col. 4).
Court Confirms Railroad Sale Proceedings
CEMENT PRICE RAISED IN SENATE The prevailing situation in the local market regarding the price of cement has been raised before the Senate. At yesterday's meeting, lumberman Francisco L. Anielml made a petition to that effect, filing it with the Secretary for processing. The petition of Mr. Ansalml says: "The undersigned petitioner makes the following request: "That I request through the Secretary of the Department of Sonado and the Development Corporation the following information: (1) Price at which cement is being sold in the local market at the present time. (2) Price at which cement is being sold for export. (3) Reasons that justify the present price of cement in Puerto Rico."
Another Bill Raises Income Tax Credits Would Be *1,000 for Singles; *2,500 for Married; *600 for Dependents Another bill has been filed before the Senate to increase the tax credits on income tax returns, and to liberalize certain provisions regarding dependents. This bill, by Senator Cruz Ortiz Stella, introduces the following amendments to the Income Tax Law: "(a) In the case of a single person, a personal exemption of 91,000; or in the case of a family or a married person living with his or her husband or wife, a personal exemption of 92,500. (b) Six hundred ($800) dollars for each person (other than the husband or wife) who is dependent upon and receives support exclusively from the taxpayer, if such dependent person is under twenty-one (21) years of age or is incapable of self-support because he or she is disabled or physically handicapped or is attending college and until he or she obtains his or her optional degree, provided that the age of the student does not exceed 35 years. Head of household "81 the taxpayer has the status of head of household solely by reason of the status of one or more dependents for whom he may claim credit under this subsection, the credit with respect to one of such dependents shall not be granted. "(c) (1) The credit granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be determined by the status of the taxpayer on the last day of his taxable year. "(3) The credit allowed under subdivision (a) of this section shall be, in the event the taxpayer's marital status changed during his taxable year, the sum of (A) an amount having the same proportion to 91,000 as the number of months during which the taxpayer was single with twelve months, plus (B) an amount having the same proportion to 92.500 as ol number of months during which the taxpayer has been a married person living with his or her husband or wife or has been a head of household has with twelve Par* lo" ílnM (Continued on pg. 18, col. 7)
Federal Court yesterday issued an order directed to the Sindicato of the Compaflla del Ferrocarril, Soflor Fernando Zegrl, to pay to the workers of the company and to the Puerto Rico Railroad Transportation Company, the sum of 8754,538.33, for the settlement related to the claim of accrued and unpaid salaries to the workers. The order was issued as a result of a stipulation filed in court by the claimant workers and the Zogri trustee. As you are aware, the American Railroad and the Puerto Rico Railroad Company filed a bankruptcy petition in Federal Court some time ago, as a result of the claim for unpaid minimum wages and overtime, which amounted to more than $3 million. A reorganization plan was then submitted to the Court, approved by the Court and is in the process of being put into full effect. Under the plan, a company composed of stockholders who are members of the United Railwaymen's Union will inherit a portion of the railroad's property and will continue to operate the railroad. The workers' claim against the railroad company was settled for a total of $8,900,000, which was accepted by the Corto. David Chévez, Jr., ordered the trustee to pay the workers the sum of 8754,538.33. Of this amount, I will pay the sum of 8358,011 to the Compaflla de Trono- * porto Ferroviario do Puerto Rico, "a corporation to be organized under the laws of Puerto Rico, for the purpose of acquiring porto do lar properties and continuing to operate the railroad, pursuant to an agreement with the Puerto Rico Transportation Authority". In addition, 8358,013.77 will be paid to the workers in their capacity as such; 837,738.12 to the Union leaders and 8 814,778.14 to the Union, to settle pending claims. The order further provides that the Union shall pay the sum of $8,140,000 to the attorneys for the workers, Ernesto Ramos Antonlnl, Luis E. Dubón, Víctor Gutiérrez j and réUx O® 1 "**". "I 85,471.87 to the Union for costs. On the other hand, yesterday the clauses of Incorporation of the Puerto Rico Railroad Transportation Company, which will take over the operation of the railroad, were filed with the Executive Secretariat. Warning against the practice of keeping students more than two years in the same grade, which is prohibited, the Acting Commissioner of Instruction, Mr. Francisco Collazo, yesterday addressed the following communication to the superintendents of schools: "According to the reports on promotions, students are being kept more than two years in the same grade in elementary school. Circular Letter number 83 of April 27, 1934, prohibits such a termination, basing it on the pedagogical reason that no matter how little a student learns in the grade to which he is promoted, he will always learn more than when retained in the same grade for a third year. This statement has not been reversed at any time. On page 85 of the Annual Report of the Board of Education, for the year 194M9, there are 790 students from the urban area and 1,901 from the rural area promoted as having learned more than two years in the same grade. BILL ELIMINATING COFFEE TARIFF At its session of vlemoa the House of Representatives considered by title, on first reading, a bill providing for auaponel lpo - of 1881 the tariff on "1 Imported coffee, as fixed by the Joint Resolution of May 29, 1980. - P. C. 645, which is one of some 50 Administration bills among the 80 considered by the House on first reading, is intended to suspend the lmP®**® or® 818 per quintal that is introduced into Puerto Rico. The suspension would be for a period of one year, as established in the bill introduced by Representative Benjamin Ortta.
Speculation, Rumors Raise Coffee Prices, Claim Speculation, Rumors Raise Coffee Prices
WASHINGTON, March 10. (PU) - A South American told Congress yesterday that South American countries were offended and insulted by accusations by the United States that it had withheld coffee supplies to raise the price of coffee.) Andres Urlbe, Acting President of the Pan American Coffee Bureau, told a Senate agriculture subcommittee that coffee prices are still too low. If American workers enjoyed the same living standards as North American workers, he said, it would cost 98 times as much to produce a pound of coffee. The aubcommittee, headed by Senator Guy M. Gillette, Democrat of Iowa, is investigating the sharp rise in coffee prices, which began in the fall. Earlier witnesses have alleged that the South American coffee producer's
coffee producers have forced a price hike as stocks of the product were reduced during a period of rising demand. More Coffee Shipments Urlbe countered that the opposite is true-- "the poor coffee producers have shipped more coffee to the United States than ever before". "The Latin Americans," he said, "are offended that their national integrity has been challenged by accusations of cheating and defrauding the American consumer, and by engaging in plots and machinations. What actually drove up the price of coffee, he said, was "fear-mongering" by U.S. importers and speculators who heard "rumors" of drought and shortages in the producing countries.